    <h2>
      MEMOIR OF JOSEPH SHERIDAN LE FANU.
    </h2>
    <p>
      A noble Huguenot family, owning considerable property in Normandy, the Le
      Fanus of Caen, were, upon the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, deprived
      of their ancestral estates of Mandeville, Sequeville, and Cresseron; but,
      owing to their possessing influential relatives at the court of Louis the
      Fourteenth, were allowed to quit their country for England, unmolested,
      with their personal property. We meet with John Le Fanu de Sequeville and
      Charles Le Fanu de Cresseron, as cavalry officers in William the Third's
      army; Charles being so distinguished a member of the King's staff that he
      was presented with William's portrait from his master's own hand. He
      afterwards served as a major of dragoons under Marlborough.
    </p>
    <p>
      At the beginning of the eighteenth century, William Le Fanu was the sole
      survivor of his family. He married Henrietta Raboteau de Puggibaut, the
      last of another great and noble Huguenot family, whose escape from France,
      as a child, by the aid of a Roman Catholic uncle in high position at the
      French court, was effected after adventures of the most romantic danger.
    </p>
    <p>
      Joseph Le Fanu, the eldest of the sons of this marriage who left issue,
      held the office of Clerk of the Coast in Ireland. He married for the
      second time Alicia, daughter of Thomas Sheridan and sister of Richard
      Brinsley Sheridan; his brother, Captain Henry Le Fanu, of Leamington,
      being united to the only other sister of the great wit and orator.
    </p>
    <p>
      Dean Thomas Philip Le Fanu, the eldest son of Joseph Le Fanu, became by
      his wife Emma, daughter of Dr. Dobbin, F.T.C.D., the father of Joseph
      Sheridan Le Fanu, the subject of this memoir, whose name is so familiar to
      English and American readers as one of the greatest masters of the weird
      and the terrible amongst our modern novelists.
    </p>
    <p>
      Born in Dublin on the 28th of August, 1814, he did not begin to speak
      until he was more than two years of age; but when he had once started, the
      boy showed an unusual aptitude in acquiring fresh words, and using them
      correctly.
    </p>
    <p>
      The first evidence of literary taste which he gave was in his sixth year,
      when he made several little sketches with explanatory remarks written
      beneath them, after the manner of Du Maurier's, or Charles Keene's
      humorous illustrations in 'Punch.'
    </p>
    <p>
      One of these, preserved long afterwards by his mother, represented a
      balloon in mid-air, and two aeronauts, who had occupied it, falling
      headlong to earth, the disaster being explained by these words: 'See the
      effects of trying to go to Heaven.'
    </p>
    <p>
      As a mere child, he was a remarkably good actor, both in tragic and comic
      pieces, and was hardly twelve years old when he began to write verses of
      singular spirit for one so young. At fourteen, he produced a long Irish
      poem, which he never permitted anyone but his mother and brother to read.
      To that brother, Mr. William Le Fanu, Commissioner of Public Works,
      Ireland, to whom, as the suggester of Sheridan Le Fanu's 'Phaudrig
      Croohore' and 'Shamus O'Brien,' Irish ballad literature owes a delightful
      debt, and whose richly humorous and passionately pathetic powers as a
      raconteur of these poems have only doubled that obligation in the hearts
      of those who have been happy enough to be his hearers&mdash;to Mr. William
      Le Fanu we are indebted for the following extracts from the first of his
      works, which the boy-author seems to have set any store by:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     'Muse of Green Erin, break thine icy slumbers!
        Strike once again thy wreathed lyre!
      Burst forth once more and wake thy tuneful numbers!
        Kindle again thy long-extinguished fire!

     'Why should I bid thee, Muse of Erin, waken?
        Why should I bid thee strike thy harp once more?
      Better to leave thee silent and forsaken
        Than wake thee but thy glories to deplore.

     'How could I bid thee tell of Tara's Towers,
        Where once thy sceptred Princes sate in state&mdash;
      Where rose thy music, at the festive hours,
        Through the proud halls where listening thousands
             sate?

     'Fallen are thy fair palaces, thy country's glory,
        Thy tuneful bards were banished or were slain,
      Some rest in glory on their deathbeds gory,
        And some have lived to feel a foeman's chain.

     'Yet for the sake of thy unhappy nation,
        Yet for the sake of Freedom's spirit fled,
      Let thy wild harpstrings, thrilled with indignation,
        Peal a deep requiem o'er thy sons that bled.

     'O yes! like the last breath of evening sighing,
        Sweep thy cold hand the silent strings along,
      Flash like the lamp beside the hero dying,
        Then hushed for ever be thy plaintive song.'
</pre>
    <p>
      To Mr. William Le Fanu we are further indebted for the accompanying
      specimens of his brother's serious and humorous powers in verse, written
      when he was quite a lad, as valentines to a Miss G. K.:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     'Life were too long for me to bear
        If banished from thy view;
      Life were too short, a thousand year,
        If life were passed with you.

     'Wise men have said "Man's lot on earth
        Is grief and melancholy,"
      But where thou art, there joyous mirth
        Proves all their wisdom folly.

     'If fate withhold thy love from me,
        All else in vain were given;
      Heaven were imperfect wanting thee,
        And with thee earth were heaven.'

     A few days after, he sent the following sequel:
</pre>
    <p>
      'My dear good Madam, You can't think how very sad I'm. I sent you, or I
      mistake myself foully, A very excellent imitation of the poet Cowley,
      Containing three very fair stanzas, Which number Longinus, a very critical
      man, says, And Aristotle, who was a critic ten times more caustic, To a
      nicety fits a valentine or an acrostic. And yet for all my pains to this
      moving epistle, I have got no answer, so I suppose I may go whistle.
      Perhaps you'd have preferred that like an old monk I had pattered on In
      the style and after the manner of the unfortunate Chatterton; Or that,
      unlike my reverend daddy's son, I had attempted the classicalities of the
      dull, though immortal Addison.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     I can't endure this silence another week;
     What shall I do in order to make you speak?
                 Shall I give you a trope
                 In the manner of Pope,
     Or hammer my brains like an old smith
     To get out something like Goldsmith?
     Or shall I aspire on
     To tune my poetic lyre on
     The same key touched by Byron,
     And laying my hand its wire on,
     With its music your soul set fire on
     By themes you ne'er could tire on?
                 Or say,
                 I pray,
                 Would a lay
                 Like Gay
                 Be more in your way?
            I leave it to you,
            Which am I to do?
            It plain on the surface is
            That any metamorphosis,
            To affect your study
            You may work on my soul or body.
     Your frown or your smile makes me Savage or Gay
       In action, as well as in song;
     And if 'tis decreed I at length become Gray,
       Express but the word and I'm Young;
     And if in the Church I should ever aspire
       With friars and abbots to cope,
     By a nod, if you please, you can make me a Prior&mdash;
       By a word you render me Pope.
     If you'd eat, I'm a Crab; if you'd cut, I'm your Steel,
       As sharp as you'd get from the cutler;
     I'm your Cotton whene'er you're in want of a reel,
       And your livery carry, as Butler.
                 I'll ever rest your debtor
                 If you'll answer my first letter;
                 Or must, alas, eternity
                 Witness your taciturnity?
                 Speak&mdash;and oh! speak quickly
                 Or else I shall grow sickly,
                           And pine,
                           And whine,
                 And grow yellow and brown
                   As e'er was mahogany,
                 And lie me down
                   And die in agony.

        P.S.&mdash;You'll allow I have the gift
              To write like the immortal Swift.'
</pre>
    <p>
      But besides the poetical powers with which he was endowed, in common with
      the great Brinsley, Lady Dufferin, and the Hon. Mrs. Norton, young
      Sheridan Le Fanu also possessed an irresistible humour and oratorical gift
      that, as a student of Old Trinity, made him a formidable rival of the best
      of the young debaters of his time at the 'College Historical,' not a few
      of whom have since reached the highest eminence at the Irish Bar, after
      having long enlivened and charmed St. Stephen's by their wit and oratory.
    </p>
    <p>
      Amongst his compeers he was remarkable for his sudden fiery eloquence of
      attack, and ready and rapid powers of repartee when on his defence. But Le
      Fanu, whose understanding was elevated by a deep love of the classics, in
      which he took university honours, and further heightened by an admirable
      knowledge of our own great authors, was not to be tempted away by oratory
      from literature, his first and, as it proved, his last love.
    </p>
    <p>
      Very soon after leaving college, and just when he was called to the Bar,
      about the year 1838, he bought the 'Warder,' a Dublin newspaper, of which
      he was editor, and took what many of his best friends and admirers,
      looking to his high prospects as a barrister, regarded at the time as a
      fatal step in his career to fame.
    </p>
    <p>
      Just before this period, Le Fanu had taken to writing humorous Irish
      stories, afterwards published in the 'Dublin University Magazine,' such as
      the 'Quare Gander,' 'Jim Sulivan's Adventure,' 'The Ghost and the
      Bone-setter,' etc.
    </p>
    <p>
      These stories his brother William Le Fanu was in the habit of repeating
      for his friends' amusement, and about the year 1837, when he was about
      twenty-three years of age, Joseph Le Fanu said to him that he thought an
      Irish story in verse would tell well, and that if he would choose him a
      subject suitable for recitation, he would write him one. 'Write me an
      Irish "Young Lochinvar,"' said his brother; and in a few days he handed
      him 'Phaudrig Croohore'&mdash;Anglice, 'Patrick Crohore.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Of course this poem has the disadvantage not only of being written after
      'Young Lochinvar,' but also that of having been directly inspired by it;
      and yet, although wanting in the rare and graceful finish of the original,
      the Irish copy has, we feel, so much fire and feeling that it at least
      tempts us to regret that Scott's poem was not written in that
      heart-stirring Northern dialect without which the noblest of our British
      ballads would lose half their spirit. Indeed, we may safely say that some
      of Le Fanu's lines are finer than any in 'Young Lochinvar,' simply because
      they seem to speak straight from a people's heart, not to be the mere
      echoes of medieval romance.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Phaudrig Croohore' did not appear in print in the 'Dublin University
      Magazine' till 1844, twelve years after its composition, when it was
      included amongst the Purcell Papers.
    </p>
    <p>
      To return to the year 1837. Mr. William Le Fanu, the suggester of this
      ballad, who was from home at the time, now received daily instalments of
      the second and more remarkable of his brother's Irish poems&mdash;'Shamus
      O'Brien' (James O'Brien)&mdash;learning them by heart as they reached him,
      and, fortunately, never forgetting them, for his brother Joseph kept no
      copy of the ballad, and he had himself to write it out from memory ten
      years after, when the poem appeared in the 'University Magazine.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Few will deny that this poem contains passages most faithfully, if
      fearfully, picturesque, and that it is characterised throughout by a
      profound pathos, and an abundant though at times a too grotesquely
      incongruous humour. Can we wonder, then, at the immense popularity with
      which Samuel Lover recited it in the United States? For to Lover's
      admiration of the poem, and his addition of it to his entertainment,
      'Shamus O'Brien' owes its introduction into America, where it is now so
      popular. Lover added some lines of his own to the poem, made Shamus
      emigrate to the States, and set up a public-house. These added lines
      appeared in most of the published versions of the poem. But they are
      indifferent as verse, and certainly injure the dramatic effect of the
      poem.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Shamus O'Brien' is so generally attributed to Lover (indeed we remember
      seeing it advertised for recitation on the occasion of a benefit at a
      leading London theatre as 'by Samuel Lover') that it is a satisfaction to
      be able to reproduce the following letter upon the subject from Lover to
      William le Fanu:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
               'Astor House,
                 'New York, U.S. America.
                      'Sept. 30, 1846.

  'My dear Le Fanu,
</pre>
    <p>
      'In reading over your brother's poem while I crossed the Atlantic, I
      became more and more impressed with its great beauty and dramatic effect&mdash;so
      much so that I determined to test its effect in public, and have done so
      here, on my first appearance, with the greatest success. Now I have no
      doubt there will be great praises of the poem, and people will suppose,
      most likely, that the composition is mine, and as you know (I take for
      granted) that I would not wish to wear a borrowed feather, I should be
      glad to give your brother's name as the author, should he not object to
      have it known; but as his writings are often of so different a tone, I
      would not speak without permission to do so. It is true that in my
      programme my name is attached to other pieces, and no name appended to the
      recitation; so far, you will see, I have done all I could to avoid
      "appropriating," the spirit of which I might have caught here, with Irish
      aptitude; but I would like to have the means of telling all whom it may
      concern the name of the author, to whose head and heart it does so much
      honour. Pray, my dear Le Fanu, inquire, and answer me here by next packet,
      or as soon as convenient. My success here has been quite triumphant.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
'Yours very truly,

'SAMUEL LOVER.'
</pre>
    <p>
      We have heard it said (though without having inquired into the truth of
      the tradition) that 'Shamus O'Brien' was the result of a match at
      pseudo-national ballad writing made between Le Fanu and several of the
      most brilliant of his young literary confreres at T. C. D. But however
      this may be, Le Fanu undoubtedly was no young Irelander; indeed he did the
      stoutest service as a press writer in the Conservative interest, and was
      no doubt provoked as well as amused at the unexpected popularity to which
      his poem attained amongst the Irish Nationalists. And here it should be
      remembered that the ballad was written some eleven years before the
      outbreak of '48, and at a time when a '98 subject might fairly have been
      regarded as legitimate literary property amongst the most loyal.
    </p>
    <p>
      We left Le Fanu as editor of the 'Warder.' He afterwards purchased the
      'Dublin Evening Packet,' and much later the half-proprietorship of the
      'Dublin Evening Mail.' Eleven or twelve years ago he also became the owner
      and editor of the 'Dublin University Magazine,' in which his later as well
      as earlier Irish Stories appeared. He sold it about a year before his
      death in 1873, having previously parted with the 'Warder' and his share in
      the 'Evening Mail.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He had previously published in the 'Dublin University Magazine' a number
      of charming lyrics, generally anonymously, and it is to be feared that all
      clue to the identification of most of these is lost, except that of
      internal evidence.
    </p>
    <p>
      The following poem, undoubtedly his, should make general our regret at
      being unable to fix with certainty upon its fellows:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     'One wild and distant bugle sound
        Breathed o'er Killarney's magic shore
      Will shed sweet floating echoes round
        When that which made them is no more.

     'So slumber in the human heart
        Wild echoes, that will sweetly thrill
      The words of kindness when the voice
        That uttered them for aye is still.

     'Oh! memory, though thy records tell
        Full many a tale of grief and sorrow,
      Of mad excess, of hope decayed,
        Of dark and cheerless melancholy;

     'Still, memory, to me thou art
        The dearest of the gifts of mind,
      For all the joys that touch my heart
        Are joys that I have left behind.
</pre>
    <p>
      Le Fanu's literary life may be divided into three distinct periods. During
      the first of these, and till his thirtieth year, he was an Irish ballad,
      song, and story writer, his first published story being the 'Adventures of
      Sir Robert Ardagh,' which appeared in the 'Dublin University Magazine' of
      1838.
    </p>
    <p>
      In 1844 he was united to Miss Susan Bennett, the beautiful daughter of the
      late George Bennett, Q.C. From this time until her decease, in 1858, he
      devoted his energies almost entirely to press work, making, however, his
      first essays in novel writing during that period. The 'Cock and Anchor,' a
      chronicle of old Dublin city, his first and, in the opinion of competent
      critics, one of the best of his novels, seeing the light about the year
      1850. This work, it is to be feared, is out of print, though there is now
      a cheap edition of 'Torlogh O'Brien,' its immediate successor. The
      comparative want of success of these novels seems to have deterred Le Fanu
      from using his pen, except as a press writer, until 1863, when the 'House
      by the Churchyard' was published, and was soon followed by 'Uncle Silas'
      and his five other well-known novels.
    </p>
    <p>
      We have considered Le Fanu as a ballad writer and poet. As a press writer
      he is still most honourably remembered for his learning and brilliancy,
      and the power and point of his sarcasm, which long made the 'Dublin
      Evening Mail' one of the most formidable of Irish press critics; but let
      us now pass to the consideration of him in the capacity of a novelist, and
      in particular as the author of 'Uncle Silas.'
    </p>
    <p>
      There are evidences in 'Shamus O'Brien,' and even in 'Phaudrig Croohore,'
      of a power over the mysterious, the grotesque, and the horrible, which so
      singularly distinguish him as a writer of prose fiction.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Uncle Silas,' the fairest as well as most familiar instance of this
      enthralling spell over his readers, is too well known a story to tell in
      detail. But how intensely and painfully distinct is the opening
      description of the silent, inflexible Austin Ruthyn of Knowl, and his shy,
      sweet daughter Maude, the one so resolutely confident in his brother's
      honour, the other so romantically and yet anxiously interested in her
      uncle&mdash;the sudden arrival of Dr. Bryerly, the strange Swedenborgian,
      followed by the equally unexpected apparition of Madame de la Rougiere,
      Austin Ruthyn's painful death, and the reading of his strange will
      consigning poor Maude to the protection of her unknown Uncle Silas&mdash;her
      cousin, good, bright devoted Monica Knollys, and her dreadful distrust of
      Silas&mdash;Bartram Haugh and its uncanny occupants, and foremost amongst
      them Uncle Silas.
    </p>
    <p>
      This is his portrait:
    </p>
    <p>
      'A face like marble, with a fearful monumental look, and for an old man,
      singularly vivid, strange eyes, the singularity of which rather grew upon
      me as I looked; for his eyebrows were still black, though his hair
      descended from his temples in long locks of the purest silver and fine as
      silk, nearly to his shoulders.
    </p>
    <p>
      'He rose, tall and slight, a little stooped, all in black, with an ample
      black velvet tunic, which was rather a gown than a coat....
    </p>
    <p>
      'I know I can't convey in words an idea of this apparition, drawn, as it
      seemed, in black and white, venerable, bloodless, fiery-eyed, with its
      singular look of power, and an expression so bewildering&mdash;was it
      derision, or anguish, or cruelty, or patience?
    </p>
    <p>
      'The wild eyes of this strange old man were fixed on me as he rose; an
      habitual contraction, which in certain lights took the character of a
      scowl, did not relax as he advanced towards me with a thin-lipped smile.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Old Dicken and his daughter Beauty, old L'Amour and Dudley Ruthyn, now
      enter upon the scene, each a fresh shadow to deepen its already sombre
      hue, while the gloom gathers in spite of the glimpse of sunshine shot
      through it by the visit to Elverston. Dudley's brutal encounter with
      Captain Oakley, and vile persecution of poor Maude till his love marriage
      comes to light, lead us on to the ghastly catastrophe, the hideous
      conspiracy of Silas and his son against the life of the innocent girl.
    </p>
    <p>
      It is interesting to know that the germ of Uncle Silas first appeared in
      the 'Dublin University Magazine' of 1837 or 1838, as the short tale,
      entitled, 'A Passage from the Secret History of an Irish Countess,' which
      is printed in this collection of Stories. It next was published as 'The
      Murdered Cousin' in a collection of Christmas stories, and finally
      developed into the three-volume novel we have just noticed.
    </p>
    <p>
      There are about Le Fanu's narratives touches of nature which reconcile us
      to their always remarkable and often supernatural incidents. His
      characters are well conceived and distinctly drawn, and strong soliloquy
      and easy dialogue spring unaffectedly from their lips. He is a close
      observer of Nature, and reproduces her wilder effects of storm and gloom
      with singular vividness; while he is equally at home in his descriptions
      of still life, some of which remind us of the faithfully minute detail of
      old Dutch pictures.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mr. Wilkie Collins, amongst our living novelists, best compares with Le
      Fanu. Both of these writers are remarkable for the ingenious mystery with
      which they develop their plots, and for the absorbing, if often
      over-sensational, nature of their incidents; but whilst Mr. Collins
      excites and fascinates our attention by an intense power of realism which
      carries us with unreasoning haste from cover to cover of his works, Le
      Fanu is an idealist, full of high imagination, and an artist who devotes
      deep attention to the most delicate detail in his portraiture of men and
      women, and his descriptions of the outdoor and indoor worlds&mdash;a
      writer, therefore, through whose pages it would be often an indignity to
      hasten. And this more leisurely, and certainly more classical, conduct of
      his stories makes us remember them more fully and faithfully than those of
      the author of the 'Woman in White.' Mr. Collins is generally dramatic, and
      sometimes stagy, in his effects. Le Fanu, while less careful to arrange
      his plots, so as to admit of their being readily adapted for the stage,
      often surprises us by scenes of so much greater tragic intensity that we
      cannot but lament that he did not, as Mr. Collins has done, attempt the
      drama, and so furnish another ground of comparison with his
      fellow-countryman, Maturin (also, if we mistake not, of French origin),
      whom, in his writings, Le Fanu far more closely resembles than Mr.
      Collins, as a master of the darker and stronger emotions of human
      character. But, to institute a broader ground of comparison between Le
      Fanu and Mr. Collins, whilst the idiosyncrasies of the former's
      characters, however immaterial those characters may be, seem always to
      suggest the minutest detail of his story, the latter would appear to
      consider plot as the prime, character as a subsidiary element in the art
      of novel writing.
    </p>
    <p>
      Those who possessed the rare privilege of Le Fanu's friendship, and only
      they, can form any idea of the true character of the man; for after the
      death of his wife, to whom he was most deeply devoted, he quite forsook
      general society, in which his fine features, distinguished bearing, and
      charm of conversation marked him out as the beau-ideal of an Irish wit and
      scholar of the old school.
    </p>
    <p>
      From this society he vanished so entirely that Dublin, always ready with a
      nickname, dubbed him 'The Invisible Prince;' and indeed he was for long
      almost invisible, except to his family and most familiar friends, unless
      at odd hours of the evening, when he might occasionally be seen stealing,
      like the ghost of his former self, between his newspaper office and his
      home in Merrion Square; sometimes, too, he was to be encountered in an old
      out-of-the-way bookshop poring over some rare black letter Astrology or
      Demonology.
    </p>
    <p>
      To one of these old bookshops he was at one time a pretty frequent
      visitor, and the bookseller relates how he used to come in and ask with
      his peculiarly pleasant voice and smile, 'Any more ghost stories for me,
      Mr. &mdash;&mdash;-?' and how, on a fresh one being handed to him, he
      would seldom leave the shop until he had looked it through. This taste for
      the supernatural seems to have grown upon him after his wife's death, and
      influenced him so deeply that, had he not been possessed of a deal of
      shrewd common sense, there might have been danger of his embracing some of
      the visionary doctrines in which he was so learned. But no! even
      Spiritualism, to which not a few of his brother novelists succumbed,
      whilst affording congenial material for our artist of the superhuman to
      work upon, did not escape his severest satire.
    </p>
    <p>
      Shortly after completing his last novel, strange to say, bearing the title
      'Willing to Die,' Le Fanu breathed his last at his home No. 18, Merrion
      Square South, at the age of fifty-nine.
    </p>
    <p>
      'He was a man,' writes the author of a brief memoir of him in the 'Dublin
      University Magazine,' 'who thought deeply, especially on religious
      subjects. To those who knew him he was very dear; they admired him for his
      learning, his sparkling wit, and pleasant conversation, and loved him for
      his manly virtues, for his noble and generous qualities, his gentleness,
      and his loving, affectionate nature.' And all who knew the man must feel
      how deeply deserved are these simple words of sincere regard for Joseph
      Sheridan Le Fanu.
    </p>
    <p>
      Le Fanu's novels are accessible to all; but his Purcell Papers are now for
      the first time collected and published, by the permission of his eldest
      son (the late Mr. Philip Le Fanu), and very much owing to the friendly and
      active assistance of his brother, Mr. William Le Fanu.
    </p>
    <h2>
      THE GHOST AND THE BONE SETTER.
    </h2>
    <p>
      In looking over the papers of my late valued and respected friend, Francis
      Purcell, who for nearly fifty years discharged the arduous duties of a
      parish priest in the south of Ireland, I met with the following document.
      It is one of many such; for he was a curious and industrious collector of
      old local traditions&mdash;a commodity in which the quarter where he
      resided mightily abounded. The collection and arrangement of such legends
      was, as long as I can remember him, his hobby; but I had never learned
      that his love of the marvellous and whimsical had carried him so far as to
      prompt him to commit the results of his inquiries to writing, until, in
      the character of residuary legatee, his will put me in possession of all
      his manuscript papers. To such as may think the composing of such
      productions as these inconsistent with the character and habits of a
      country priest, it is necessary to observe, that there did exist a race of
      priests&mdash;those of the old school, a race now nearly extinct&mdash;whose
      education abroad tended to produce in them tastes more literary than have
      yet been evinced by the alumni of Maynooth.
    </p>
    <p>
      It is perhaps necessary to add that the superstition illustrated by the
      following story, namely, that the corpse last buried is obliged, during
      his juniority of interment, to supply his brother tenants of the
      churchyard in which he lies, with fresh water to allay the burning thirst
      of purgatory, is prevalent throughout the south of Ireland.
    </p>
    <p>
      The writer can vouch for a case in which a respectable and wealthy farmer,
      on the borders of Tipperary, in tenderness to the corns of his departed
      helpmate, enclosed in her coffin two pair of brogues, a light and a heavy,
      the one for dry, the other for sloppy weather; seeking thus to mitigate
      the fatigues of her inevitable perambulations in procuring water and
      administering it to the thirsty souls of purgatory. Fierce and desperate
      conflicts have ensued in the case of two funeral parties approaching the
      same churchyard together, each endeavouring to secure to his own dead
      priority of sepulture, and a consequent immunity from the tax levied upon
      the pedestrian powers of the last-comer. An instance not long since
      occurred, in which one of two such parties, through fear of losing to
      their deceased friend this inestimable advantage, made their way to the
      churchyard by a short cut, and, in violation of one of their strongest
      prejudices, actually threw the coffin over the wall, lest time should be
      lost in making their entrance through the gate. Innumerable instances of
      the same kind might be quoted, all tending to show how strongly among the
      peasantry of the south this superstition is entertained. However, I shall
      not detain the reader further by any prefatory remarks, but shall proceed
      to lay before him the following:
    </p>
    <p>
      Extract from the MS. Papers of the late Rev. Francis Purcell, of
      Drumcoolagh.
    </p>
    <p>
      I tell the following particulars, as nearly as I can recollect them, in
      the words of the narrator. It may be necessary to observe that he was what
      is termed a well-spoken man, having for a considerable time instructed the
      ingenious youth of his native parish in such of the liberal arts and
      sciences as he found it convenient to profess&mdash;a circumstance which
      may account for the occurrence of several big words in the course of this
      narrative, more distinguished for euphonious effect than for correctness
      of application. I proceed then, without further preface, to lay before you
      the wonderful adventures of Terry Neil.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Why, thin, 'tis a quare story, an' as thrue as you're sittin' there; and
      I'd make bould to say there isn't a boy in the seven parishes could tell
      it better nor crickther than myself, for 'twas my father himself it
      happened to, an' many's the time I heerd it out iv his own mouth; an' I
      can say, an' I'm proud av that same, my father's word was as incredible as
      any squire's oath in the counthry; and so signs an' if a poor man got into
      any unlucky throuble, he was the boy id go into the court an' prove; but
      that doesn't signify&mdash;he was as honest and as sober a man, barrin' he
      was a little bit too partial to the glass, as you'd find in a day's walk;
      an' there wasn't the likes of him in the counthry round for nate labourin'
      an' baan diggin'; and he was mighty handy entirely for carpenther's work,
      and men din' ould spudethrees, an' the likes i' that. An' so he tuk up
      with bone-settin', as was most nathural, for none of them could come up to
      him in mendin' the leg iv a stool or a table; an' sure, there never was a
      bone-setter got so much custom-man an' child, young an' ould&mdash;there
      never was such breakin' and mendin' of bones known in the memory of man.
      Well, Terry Neil&mdash;for that was my father's name&mdash;began to feel
      his heart growin' light, and his purse heavy; an' he took a bit iv a farm
      in Squire Phelim's ground, just undher the ould castle, an' a pleasant
      little spot it was; an' day an' mornin' poor crathurs not able to put a
      foot to the ground, with broken arms and broken legs, id be comin'
      ramblin' in from all quarters to have their bones spliced up. Well, yer
      honour, all this was as well as well could be; but it was customary when
      Sir Phelim id go anywhere out iv the country, for some iv the tinants to
      sit up to watch in the ould castle, just for a kind of compliment to the
      ould family&mdash;an' a mighty unplisant compliment it was for the
      tinants, for there wasn't a man of them but knew there was something quare
      about the ould castle. The neighbours had it, that the squire's ould
      grandfather, as good a gintlenlan&mdash;God be with him&mdash;as I heer'd,
      as ever stood in shoe-leather, used to keep walkin' about in the middle iv
      the night, ever sinst he bursted a blood vessel pullin' out a cork out iv
      a bottle, as you or I might be doin', and will too, plase God&mdash;but
      that doesn't signify. So, as I was sayin', the ould squire used to come
      down out of the frame, where his picthur was hung up, and to break the
      bottles and glasses&mdash;God be marciful to us all&mdash;an' dthrink all
      he could come at&mdash;an' small blame to him for that same; and then if
      any of the family id be comin' in, he id be up again in his place, looking
      as quite an' as innocent as if he didn't know anything about it&mdash;the
      mischievous ould chap.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, your honour, as I was sayin', one time the family up at the castle
      was stayin' in Dublin for a week or two; and so, as usual, some of the
      tinants had to sit up in the castle, and the third night it kem to my
      father's turn. "Oh, tare an' ouns!" says he unto himself, "an' must I sit
      up all night, and that ould vagabone of a sperit, glory be to God," says
      he, "serenadin' through the house, an' doin' all sorts iv mischief?"
      However, there was no gettin' aff, and so he put a bould face on it, an'
      he went up at nightfall with a bottle of pottieen, and another of holy
      wather.
    </p>
    <p>
      'It was rainin' smart enough, an' the evenin' was darksome and gloomy,
      when my father got in; and what with the rain he got, and the holy wather
      he sprinkled on himself, it wasn't long till he had to swally a cup iv the
      pottieen, to keep the cowld out iv his heart. It was the ould steward,
      Lawrence Connor, that opened the door&mdash;and he an' my father wor
      always very great. So when he seen who it was, an' my father tould him how
      it was his turn to watch in the castle, he offered to sit up along with
      him; and you may be sure my father wasn't sorry for that same. So says
      Larry:
    </p>
    <p>
      '"We'll have a bit iv fire in the parlour," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"An' why not in the hall?" says my father, for he knew that the squire's
      picthur was hung in the parlour.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"No fire can be lit in the hall," says Lawrence, "for there's an ould
      jackdaw's nest in the chimney."
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Oh thin," says my father, "let us stop in the kitchen, for it's very
      unproper for the likes iv me to be sittin' in the parlour," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Oh, Terry, that can't be," says Lawrence; "if we keep up the ould custom
      at all, we may as well keep it up properly," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Divil sweep the ould custom!" says my father&mdash;to himself, do ye
      mind, for he didn't like to let Lawrence see that he was more afeard
      himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Oh, very well," says he. "I'm agreeable, Lawrence," says he; and so down
      they both wint to the kitchen, until the fire id be lit in the parlour&mdash;an'
      that same wasn't long doin'.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, your honour, they soon wint up again, an' sat down mighty
      comfortable by the parlour fire, and they beginned to talk, an' to smoke,
      an' to dhrink a small taste iv the pottieen; and, moreover, they had a
      good rousin' fire o' bogwood and turf, to warm their shins over.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, sir, as I was sayin' they kep' convarsin' and smokin' together most
      agreeable, until Lawrence beginn'd to get sleepy, as was but nathural for
      him, for he was an ould sarvint man, and was used to a great dale iv
      sleep.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Sure it's impossible," says my father, "it's gettin' sleepy you are?"
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Oh, divil a taste," says Larry; "I'm only shuttin' my eyes," says he,
      "to keep out the parfume o' the tibacky smoke, that's makin' them wather,"
      says he. "So don't you mind other people's business," says he, stiff
      enough, for he had a mighty high stomach av his own (rest his sowl), "and
      go on," says he, "with your story, for I'm listenin'," says he, shuttin'
      down his eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, when my father seen spakin' was no use, he went on with his story.
      By the same token, it was the story of Jim Soolivan and his ould goat he
      was tellin'&mdash;an' a plisant story it is&mdash;an' there was so much
      divarsion in it, that it was enough to waken a dormouse, let alone to
      pervint a Christian goin' asleep. But, faix, the way my father tould it, I
      believe there never was the likes heerd sinst nor before, for he bawled
      out every word av it, as if the life was fairly lavin' him, thrying to
      keep ould Larry awake; but, faix, it was no use, for the hoorsness came an
      him, an' before he kem to the end of his story Larry O'Connor beginned to
      snore like a bagpipes.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Oh, blur an' agres," says my father, "isn't this a hard case," says he,
      "that ould villain, lettin' on to be my friend, and to go asleep this way,
      an' us both in the very room with a sperit," says he. "The crass o' Christ
      about us!" says he; and with that he was goin' to shake Lawrence to waken
      him, but he just remimbered if he roused him, that he'd surely go off to
      his bed, an' lave him complately alone, an' that id be by far worse.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Oh thin," says my father, "I'll not disturb the poor boy. It id be
      neither friendly nor good-nathured," says he, "to tormint him while he is
      asleep," says he; "only I wish I was the same way, myself," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'An' with that he beginned to walk up an' down, an' sayin' his prayers,
      until he worked himself into a sweat, savin' your presence. But it was all
      no good; so he dthrunk about a pint of sperits, to compose his mind.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Oh," says he, "I wish to the Lord I was as asy in my mind as Larry
      there. Maybe," says he, "if I thried I could go asleep;" an' with that he
      pulled a big arm-chair close beside Lawrence, an' settled himself in it as
      well as he could.
    </p>
    <p>
      'But there was one quare thing I forgot to tell you. He couldn't help, in
      spite av himself, lookin' now an' thin at the picthur, an' he immediately
      obsarved that the eyes av it was follyin' him about, an' starin' at him,
      an' winkin' at him, wheriver he wint. "Oh," says he, when he seen that,
      "it's a poor chance I have," says he; "an' bad luck was with me the day I
      kem into this unforthunate place," says he. "But any way there's no use in
      bein' freckened now," says he; "for if I am to die, I may as well parspire
      undaunted," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, your honour, he thried to keep himself quite an' asy, an' he
      thought two or three times he might have wint asleep, but for the way the
      storm was groanin' and creakin' through the great heavy branches outside,
      an' whistlin' through the ould chimleys iv the castle. Well, afther one
      great roarin' blast iv the wind, you'd think the walls iv the castle was
      just goin' to fall, quite an' clane, with the shakin' iv it. All av a
      suddint the storm stopt, as silent an' as quite as if it was a July
      evenin'. Well, your honour, it wasn't stopped blowin' for three minnites,
      before he thought he hard a sort iv a noise over the chimley-piece; an'
      with that my father just opened his eyes the smallest taste in life, an'
      sure enough he seen the ould squire gettin' out iv the picthur, for all
      the world as if he was throwin' aff his ridin' coat, until he stept out
      clane an' complate, out av the chimley-piece, an' thrun himself down an
      the floor. Well, the slieveen ould chap&mdash;an' my father thought it was
      the dirtiest turn iv all&mdash;before he beginned to do anything out iv
      the way, he stopped for a while to listen wor they both asleep; an' as
      soon as he thought all was quite, he put out his hand and tuk hould iv the
      whisky bottle, an dhrank at laste a pint iv it. Well, your honour, when he
      tuk his turn out iv it, he settled it back mighty cute entirely, in the
      very same spot it was in before. An' he beginned to walk up an' down the
      room, lookin' as sober an' as solid as if he never done the likes at all.
      An' whinever he went apast my father, he thought he felt a great scent of
      brimstone, an' it was that that freckened him entirely; for he knew it was
      brimstone that was burned in hell, savin' your presence. At any rate, he
      often heerd it from Father Murphy, an' he had a right to know what
      belonged to it&mdash;he's dead since, God rest him. Well, your honour, my
      father was asy enough until the sperit kem past him; so close, God be
      marciful to us all, that the smell iv the sulphur tuk the breath clane out
      iv him; an' with that he tuk such a fit iv coughin', that it al-a-most
      shuk him out iv the chair he was sittin' in.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Ho, ho!" says the squire, stoppin' short about two steps aff, and
      turnin' round facin' my father, "is it you that's in it?&mdash;an' how's
      all with you, Terry Neil?"
    </p>
    <p>
      '"At your honour's sarvice," says my father (as well as the fright id let
      him, for he was more dead than alive), "an' it's proud I am to see your
      honour to-night," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Terence," says the squire, "you're a respectable man" (an' it was thrue
      for him), "an industhrious, sober man, an' an example of inebriety to the
      whole parish," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Thank your honour," says my father, gettin' courage, "you were always a
      civil spoken gintleman, God rest your honour."
    </p>
    <p>
      '"REST my honour?" says the sperit (fairly gettin' red in the face with
      the madness), "Rest my honour?" says he. "Why, you ignorant spalpeen,"
      says he, "you mane, niggarly ignoramush," says he, "where did you lave
      your manners?" says he. "If I AM dead, it's no fault iv mine," says he;
      "an' it's not to be thrun in my teeth at every hand's turn, by the likes
      iv you," says he, stampin' his foot an the flure, that you'd think the
      boords id smash undther him.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Oh," says my father, "I'm only a foolish, ignorant poor man," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"You're nothing else," says the squire: "but any way," says he, "it's not
      to be listenin' to your gosther, nor convarsin' with the likes iv you,
      that I came UP&mdash;down I mane," says he&mdash;(an' as little as the
      mistake was, my father tuk notice iv it). "Listen to me now, Terence
      Neil," says he: "I was always a good masther to Pathrick Neil, your
      grandfather," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"'Tis thrue for your honour," says my father.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"And, moreover, I think I was always a sober, riglar gintleman," says the
      squire.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"That's your name, sure enough," says my father (though it was a big lie
      for him, but he could not help it).
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Well," says the sperit, "although I was as sober as most men&mdash;at
      laste as most gintlemin," says he; "an' though I was at different pariods
      a most extempory Christian, and most charitable and inhuman to the poor,"
      says he; "for all that I'm not as asy where I am now," says he, "as I had
      a right to expect," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"An' more's the pity," says my father. "Maybe your honour id wish to have
      a word with Father Murphy?"
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Hould your tongue, you misherable bliggard," says the squire; "it's not
      iv my sowl I'm thinkin'&mdash;an' I wondther you'd have the impitence to
      talk to a gintleman consarnin' his sowl; and when I want THAT fixed," says
      he, slappin' his thigh, "I'll go to them that knows what belongs to the
      likes," says he. "It's not my sowl," says he, sittin' down opossite my
      father; "it's not my sowl that's annoyin' me most&mdash;I'm unasy on my
      right leg," says he, "that I bruk at Glenvarloch cover the day I killed
      black Barney."
    </p>
    <p>
      'My father found out afther, it was a favourite horse that fell undher
      him, afther leapin' the big fence that runs along by the glin.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"I hope," says my father, "your honour's not unasy about the killin' iv
      him?"
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Hould your tongue, ye fool," said the squire, "an' I'll tell you why I'm
      unasy on my leg," says he. "In the place, where I spend most iv my time,"
      says he, "except the little leisure I have for lookin' about me here,"
      says he, "I have to walk a great dale more than I was ever used to," says
      he, "and by far more than is good for me either," says he; "for I must
      tell you," says he, "the people where I am is ancommonly fond iv cowld
      wather, for there is nothin' betther to be had; an', moreover, the weather
      is hotter than is altogether plisant," says he; "and I'm appinted," says
      he, "to assist in carryin' the wather, an' gets a mighty poor share iv it
      myself," says he, "an' a mighty throublesome, wearin' job it is, I can
      tell you," says he; "for they're all iv them surprisinly dthry, an'
      dthrinks it as fast as my legs can carry it," says he; "but what kills me
      intirely," says he, "is the wakeness in my leg," says he, "an' I want you
      to give it a pull or two to bring it to shape," says he, "and that's the
      long an' the short iv it," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Oh, plase your honour," says my father (for he didn't like to handle the
      sperit at all), "I wouldn't have the impidence to do the likes to your
      honour," says he; "it's only to poor crathurs like myself I'd do it to,"
      says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"None iv your blarney," says the squire. "Here's my leg," says he,
      cockin' it up to him&mdash;"pull it for the bare life," says he; an'"if
      you don't, by the immortial powers I'll not lave a bone in your carcish
      I'll not powdher," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'When my father heerd that, he seen there was no use in purtendin', so he
      tuk hould iv the leg, an' he kep' pullin' an' pullin', till the sweat, God
      bless us, beginned to pour down his face.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Pull, you divil!" says the squire.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"At your sarvice, your honour," says my father.
    </p>
    <p>
      "'Pull harder," says the squire.
    </p>
    <p>
      'My father pulled like the divil.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"I'll take a little sup," says the squire, rachin' over his hand to the
      bottle, "to keep up my courage," says he, lettin' an to be very wake in
      himself intirely. But, as cute as he was, he was out here, for he tuk the
      wrong one. "Here's to your good health, Terence," says he; "an' now pull
      like the very divil." An' with that he lifted the bottle of holy wather,
      but it was hardly to his mouth, whin he let a screech out, you'd think the
      room id fairly split with it, an' made one chuck that sent the leg clane
      aff his body in my father's hands. Down wint the squire over the table,
      an' bang wint my father half-way across the room on his back, upon the
      flure. Whin he kem to himself the cheerful mornin' sun was shinin' through
      the windy shutthers, an' he was lying flat an his back, with the leg iv
      one of the great ould chairs pulled clane out iv the socket an' tight in
      his hand, pintin' up to the ceilin', an' ould Larry fast asleep, an'
      snorin' as loud as ever. My father wint that mornin' to Father Murphy, an'
      from that to the day of his death, he never neglected confission nor mass,
      an' what he tould was betther believed that he spake av it but seldom.
      An', as for the squire, that is the sperit, whether it was that he did not
      like his liquor, or by rason iv the loss iv his leg, he was never known to
      walk agin.'
    </p>
    <h2>
      THE FORTUNES OF SIR ROBERT ARDAGH.
    </h2>
    <h3>
      Being a second Extract from the Papers of the late Father Purcell.
    </h3>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     'The earth hath bubbles as the water hath&mdash;
       And these are of them.'
</pre>
    <p>
      In the south of Ireland, and on the borders of the county of Limerick,
      there lies a district of two or three miles in length, which is rendered
      interesting by the fact that it is one of the very few spots throughout
      this country, in which some vestiges of aboriginal forest still remain. It
      has little or none of the lordly character of the American forest, for the
      axe has felled its oldest and its grandest trees; but in the close wood
      which survives, live all the wild and pleasing peculiarities of nature:
      its complete irregularity, its vistas, in whose perspective the quiet
      cattle are peacefully browsing; its refreshing glades, where the grey
      rocks arise from amid the nodding fern; the silvery shafts of the old
      birch trees; the knotted trunks of the hoary oak, the grotesque but
      graceful branches which never shed their honours under the tyrant
      pruning-hook; the soft green sward; the chequered light and shade; the
      wild luxuriant weeds; the lichen and the moss&mdash;all, all are beautiful
      alike in the green freshness of spring, or in the sadness and sere of
      autumn. Their beauty is of that kind which makes the heart full with joy&mdash;appealing
      to the affections with a power which belongs to nature only. This wood
      runs up, from below the base, to the ridge of a long line of irregular
      hills, having perhaps, in primitive times, formed but the skirting of some
      mighty forest which occupied the level below.
    </p>
    <p>
      But now, alas! whither have we drifted? whither has the tide of
      civilisation borne us? It has passed over a land unprepared for it&mdash;it
      has left nakedness behind it; we have lost our forests, but our marauders
      remain; we have destroyed all that is picturesque, while we have retained
      everything that is revolting in barbarism. Through the midst of this
      woodland there runs a deep gully or glen, where the stillness of the scene
      is broken in upon by the brawling of a mountain-stream, which, however, in
      the winter season, swells into a rapid and formidable torrent.
    </p>
    <p>
      There is one point at which the glen becomes extremely deep and narrow;
      the sides descend to the depth of some hundred feet, and are so steep as
      to be nearly perpendicular. The wild trees which have taken root in the
      crannies and chasms of the rock have so intersected and entangled, that
      one can with difficulty catch a glimpse of the stream, which wheels,
      flashes, and foams below, as if exulting in the surrounding silence and
      solitude.
    </p>
    <p>
      This spot was not unwisely chosen, as a point of no ordinary strength, for
      the erection of a massive square tower or keep, one side of which rises as
      if in continuation of the precipitous cliff on which it is based.
      Originally, the only mode of ingress was by a narrow portal in the very
      wall which overtopped the precipice, opening upon a ledge of rock which
      afforded a precarious pathway, cautiously intersected, however, by a deep
      trench cut with great labour in the living rock; so that, in its original
      state, and before the introduction of artillery into the art of war, this
      tower might have been pronounced, and that not presumptuously, almost
      impregnable.
    </p>
    <p>
      The progress of improvement and the increasing security of the times had,
      however, tempted its successive proprietors, if not to adorn, at least to
      enlarge their premises, and at about the middle of the last century, when
      the castle was last inhabited, the original square tower formed but a
      small part of the edifice.
    </p>
    <p>
      The castle, and a wide tract of the surrounding country, had from time
      immemorial belonged to a family which, for distinctness, we shall call by
      the name of Ardagh; and owing to the associations which, in Ireland,
      almost always attach to scenes which have long witnessed alike the
      exercise of stern feudal authority, and of that savage hospitality which
      distinguished the good old times, this building has become the subject and
      the scene of many wild and extraordinary traditions. One of them I have
      been enabled, by a personal acquaintance with an eye-witness of the
      events, to trace to its origin; and yet it is hard to say whether the
      events which I am about to record appear more strange or improbable as
      seen through the distorting medium of tradition, or in the appalling
      dimness of uncertainty which surrounds the reality.
    </p>
    <p>
      Tradition says that, sometime in the last century, Sir Robert Ardagh, a
      young man, and the last heir of that family, went abroad and served in
      foreign armies; and that, having acquired considerable honour and
      emolument, he settled at Castle Ardagh, the building we have just now
      attempted to describe. He was what the country people call a DARK man;
      that is, he was considered morose, reserved, and ill-tempered; and, as it
      was supposed from the utter solitude of his life, was upon no terms of
      cordiality with the other members of his family.
    </p>
    <p>
      The only occasion upon which he broke through the solitary monotony of his
      life was during the continuance of the racing season, and immediately
      subsequent to it; at which time he was to be seen among the busiest upon
      the course, betting deeply and unhesitatingly, and invariably with
      success. Sir Robert was, however, too well known as a man of honour, and
      of too high a family, to be suspected of any unfair dealing. He was,
      moreover, a soldier, and a man of an intrepid as well as of a haughty
      character; and no one cared to hazard a surmise, the consequences of which
      would be felt most probably by its originator only.
    </p>
    <p>
      Gossip, however, was not silent; it was remarked that Sir Robert never
      appeared at the race-ground, which was the only place of public resort
      which he frequented, except in company with a certain strange-looking
      person, who was never seen elsewhere, or under other circumstances. It was
      remarked, too, that this man, whose relation to Sir Robert was never
      distinctly ascertained, was the only person to whom he seemed to speak
      unnecessarily; it was observed that while with the country gentry he
      exchanged no further communication than what was unavoidable in arranging
      his sporting transactions, with this person he would converse earnestly
      and frequently. Tradition asserts that, to enhance the curiosity which
      this unaccountable and exclusive preference excited, the stranger
      possessed some striking and unpleasant peculiarities of person and of garb&mdash;she
      does not say, however, what these were&mdash;but they, in conjunction with
      Sir Robert's secluded habits and extraordinary run of luck&mdash;a success
      which was supposed to result from the suggestions and immediate advice of
      the unknown&mdash;were sufficient to warrant report in pronouncing that
      there was something QUEER in the wind, and in surmising that Sir Robert
      was playing a fearful and a hazardous game, and that, in short, his
      strange companion was little better than the devil himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      Years, however, rolled quietly away, and nothing novel occurred in the
      arrangements of Castle Ardagh, excepting that Sir Robert parted with his
      odd companion, but as nobody could tell whence he came, so nobody could
      say whither he had gone. Sir Robert's habits, however, underwent no
      consequent change; he continued regularly to frequent the race meetings,
      without mixing at all in the convivialities of the gentry, and immediately
      afterwards to relapse into the secluded monotony of his ordinary life.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was said that he had accumulated vast sums of money&mdash;and, as his
      bets were always successful, and always large, such must have been the
      case. He did not suffer the acquisition of wealth, however, to influence
      his hospitality or his housekeeping&mdash;he neither purchased land, nor
      extended his establishment; and his mode of enjoying his money must have
      been altogether that of the miser&mdash;consisting merely in the pleasure
      of touching and telling his gold, and in the consciousness of wealth.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sir Robert's temper, so far from improving, became more than ever gloomy
      and morose. He sometimes carried the indulgence of his evil dispositions
      to such a height that it bordered upon insanity. During these paroxysms he
      would neither eat, drink, nor sleep. On such occasions he insisted on
      perfect privacy, even from the intrusion of his most trusted servants; his
      voice was frequently heard, sometimes in earnest supplication, sometime as
      if in loud and angry altercation with some unknown visitant; sometimes he
      would, for hours together, walk to and fro throughout the long oak
      wainscoted apartment, which he generally occupied, with wild
      gesticulations and agitated pace, in the manner of one who has been roused
      to a state of unnatural excitement by some sudden and appalling
      intimation.
    </p>
    <p>
      These paroxysms of apparent lunacy were so frightful, that during their
      continuance even his oldest and most-faithful domestics dared not approach
      him; consequently, his hours of agony were never intruded upon, and the
      mysterious causes of his sufferings appeared likely to remain hidden for
      ever.
    </p>
    <p>
      On one occasion a fit of this kind continued for an unusual time, the
      ordinary term of their duration&mdash;about two days&mdash;had been long
      past, and the old servant who generally waited upon Sir Robert after these
      visitations, having in vain listened for the well-known tinkle of his
      master's hand-bell, began to feel extremely anxious; he feared that his
      master might have died from sheer exhaustion, or perhaps put an end to his
      own existence during his miserable depression. These fears at length
      became so strong, that having in vain urged some of his brother servants
      to accompany him, he determined to go up alone, and himself see whether
      any accident had befallen Sir Robert.
    </p>
    <p>
      He traversed the several passages which conducted from the new to the more
      ancient parts of the mansion, and having arrived in the old hall of the
      castle, the utter silence of the hour, for it was very late in the night,
      the idea of the nature of the enterprise in which he was engaging himself,
      a sensation of remoteness from anything like human companionship, but,
      more than all, the vivid but undefined anticipation of something horrible,
      came upon him with such oppressive weight that he hesitated as to whether
      he should proceed. Real uneasiness, however, respecting the fate of his
      master, for whom he felt that kind of attachment which the force of
      habitual intercourse not unfrequently engenders respecting objects not in
      themselves amiable, and also a latent unwillingness to expose his weakness
      to the ridicule of his fellow-servants, combined to overcome his
      reluctance; and he had just placed his foot upon the first step of the
      staircase which conducted to his master's chamber, when his attention was
      arrested by a low but distinct knocking at the hall-door. Not, perhaps,
      very sorry at finding thus an excuse even for deferring his intended
      expedition, he placed the candle upon a stone block which lay in the hall,
      and approached the door, uncertain whether his ears had not deceived him.
      This doubt was justified by the circumstance that the hall entrance had
      been for nearly fifty years disused as a mode of ingress to the castle.
      The situation of this gate also, which we have endeavoured to describe,
      opening upon a narrow ledge of rock which overhangs a perilous cliff,
      rendered it at all times, but particularly at night, a dangerous entrance.
      This shelving platform of rock, which formed the only avenue to the door,
      was divided, as I have already stated, by a broad chasm, the planks across
      which had long disappeared by decay or otherwise, so that it seemed at
      least highly improbable that any man could have found his way across the
      passage in safety to the door, more particularly on a night like that, of
      singular darkness. The old man, therefore, listened attentively, to
      ascertain whether the first application should be followed by another. He
      had not long to wait; the same low but singularly distinct knocking was
      repeated; so low that it seemed as if the applicant had employed no harder
      or heavier instrument than his hand, and yet, despite the immense
      thickness of the door, with such strength that the sound was distinctly
      audible.
    </p>
    <p>
      The knock was repeated a third time, without any increase of loudness; and
      the old man, obeying an impulse for which to his dying hour he could never
      account, proceeded to remove, one by one, the three great oaken bars which
      secured the door. Time and damp had effectually corroded the iron chambers
      of the lock, so that it afforded little resistance. With some effort, as
      he believed, assisted from without, the old servant succeeded in opening
      the door; and a low, square-built figure, apparently that of a man wrapped
      in a large black cloak, entered the hall. The servant could not see much
      of this visitant with any distinctness; his dress appeared foreign, the
      skirt of his ample cloak was thrown over one shoulder; he wore a large
      felt hat, with a very heavy leaf, from under which escaped what appeared
      to be a mass of long sooty-black hair; his feet were cased in heavy
      riding-boots. Such were the few particulars which the servant had time and
      light to observe. The stranger desired him to let his master know
      instantly that a friend had come, by appointment, to settle some business
      with him. The servant hesitated, but a slight motion on the part of his
      visitor, as if to possess himself of the candle, determined him; so,
      taking it in his hand, he ascended the castle stairs, leaving his guest in
      the hall.
    </p>
    <p>
      On reaching the apartment which opened upon the oak-chamber he was
      surprised to observe the door of that room partly open, and the room
      itself lit up. He paused, but there was no sound; he looked in, and saw
      Sir Robert, his head and the upper part of his body reclining on a table,
      upon which burned a lamp; his arms were stretched forward on either side,
      and perfectly motionless; it appeared that, having been sitting at the
      table, he had thus sunk forward, either dead or in a swoon. There was no
      sound of breathing; all was silent, except the sharp ticking of a watch,
      which lay beside the lamp. The servant coughed twice or thrice, but with
      no effect; his fears now almost amounted to certainty, and he was
      approaching the table on which his master partly lay, to satisfy himself
      of his death, when Sir Robert slowly raised his head, and throwing himself
      back in his chair, fixed his eyes in a ghastly and uncertain gaze upon his
      attendant. At length he said, slowly and painfully, as if he dreaded the
      answer:
    </p>
    <p>
      'In God's name, what are you?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Sir,' said the servant, 'a strange gentleman wants to see you below.'
    </p>
    <p>
      At this intimation Sir Robert, starting on his feet and tossing his arms
      wildly upwards, uttered a shriek of such appalling and despairing terror
      that it was almost too fearful for human endurance; and long after the
      sound had ceased it seemed to the terrified imagination of the old servant
      to roll through the deserted passages in bursts of unnatural laughter.
      After a few moments Sir Robert said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Can't you send him away? Why does he come so soon? O God! O God! let him
      leave me for an hour; a little time. I can't see him now; try to get him
      away. You see I can't go down now; I have not strength. O God! O God! let
      him come back in an hour; it is not long to wait. He cannot lose anything
      by it; nothing, nothing, nothing. Tell him that; say anything to him.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The servant went down. In his own words, he did not feel the stairs under
      him till he got to the hall. The figure stood exactly as he had left it.
      He delivered his master's message as coherently as he could. The stranger
      replied in a careless tone:
    </p>
    <p>
      'If Sir Robert will not come down to me, I must go up to him.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The man returned, and to his surprise he found his master much more
      composed in manner. He listened to the message, and though the cold
      perspiration rose in drops upon his forehead faster than he could wipe it
      away, his manner had lost the dreadful agitation which had marked it
      before. He rose feebly, and casting a last look of agony behind him,
      passed from the room to the lobby, where he signed to his attendant not to
      follow him. The man moved as far as the head of the staircase, from whence
      he had a tolerably distinct view of the hall, which was imperfectly
      lighted by the candle he had left there.
    </p>
    <p>
      He saw his master reel, rather than walk down the stairs, clinging all the
      way to the banisters. He walked on, as if about to sink every moment from
      weakness. The figure advanced as if to meet him, and in passing struck
      down the light. The servant could see no more; but there was a sound of
      struggling, renewed at intervals with silent but fearful energy. It was
      evident, however, that the parties were approaching the door, for he heard
      the solid oak sound twice or thrice, as the feet of the combatants, in
      shuffling hither and thither over the floor, struck upon it. After a
      slight pause he heard the door thrown open with such violence that the
      leaf seemed to strike the side-wall of the hall, for it was so dark
      without that this could only be surmised by the sound. The struggle was
      renewed with an agony and intenseness of energy that betrayed itself in
      deep-drawn gasps. One desperate effort, which terminated in the breaking
      of some part of the door, producing a sound as if the door-post was
      wrenched from its position, was followed by another wrestle, evidently
      upon the narrow ledge which ran outside the door, overtopping the
      precipice. This proved to be the final struggle, for it was followed by a
      crashing sound as if some heavy body had fallen over, and was rushing down
      the precipice, through the light boughs that crossed near the top. All
      then became still as the grave, except when the moan of the night wind
      sighed up the wooded glen.
    </p>
    <p>
      The old servant had not nerve to return through the hall, and to him the
      darkness seemed all but endless; but morning at length came, and with it
      the disclosure of the events of the night. Near the door, upon the ground,
      lay Sir Robert's sword-belt, which had given way in the scuffle. A huge
      splinter from the massive door-post had been wrenched off by an almost
      superhuman effort&mdash;one which nothing but the gripe of a despairing
      man could have severed&mdash;and on the rock outside were left the marks
      of the slipping and sliding of feet.
    </p>
    <p>
      At the foot of the precipice, not immediately under the castle, but
      dragged some way up the glen, were found the remains of Sir Robert, with
      hardly a vestige of a limb or feature left distinguishable. The right
      hand, however, was uninjured, and in its fingers were clutched, with the
      fixedness of death, a long lock of coarse sooty hair&mdash;the only direct
      circumstantial evidence of the presence of a second person. So says
      tradition.
    </p>
    <p>
      This story, as I have mentioned, was current among the dealers in such
      lore; but the original facts are so dissimilar in all but the name of the
      principal person mentioned and his mode of life, and the fact that his
      death was accompanied with circumstances of extraordinary mystery, that
      the two narratives are totally irreconcilable (even allowing the utmost
      for the exaggerating influence of tradition), except by supposing report
      to have combined and blended together the fabulous histories of several
      distinct bearers of the family name. However this may be, I shall lay
      before the reader a distinct recital of the events from which the
      foregoing tradition arose. With respect to these there can be no mistake;
      they are authenticated as fully as anything can be by human testimony; and
      I state them principally upon the evidence of a lady who herself bore a
      prominent part in the strange events which she related, and which I now
      record as being among the few well-attested tales of the marvellous which
      it has been my fate to hear. I shall, as far as I am able, arrange in one
      combined narrative the evidence of several distinct persons who were
      eye-witnesses of what they related, and with the truth of whose testimony
      I am solemnly and deeply impressed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sir Robert Ardagh, as we choose to call him, was the heir and
      representative of the family whose name he bore; but owing to the
      prodigality of his father, the estates descended to him in a very impaired
      condition. Urged by the restless spirit of youth, or more probably by a
      feeling of pride which could not submit to witness, in the paternal
      mansion, what he considered a humiliating alteration in the style and
      hospitality which up to that time had distinguished his family, Sir Robert
      left Ireland and went abroad. How he occupied himself, or what countries
      he visited during his absence, was never known, nor did he afterwards make
      any allusion or encourage any inquiries touching his foreign sojourn. He
      left Ireland in the year 1742, being then just of age, and was not heard
      of until the year 1760&mdash;about eighteen years afterwards&mdash;at
      which time he returned. His personal appearance was, as might have been
      expected, very greatly altered, more altered, indeed, than the time of his
      absence might have warranted one in supposing likely. But to
      counterbalance the unfavourable change which time had wrought in his form
      and features, he had acquired all the advantages of polish of manner and
      refinement of taste which foreign travel is supposed to bestow. But what
      was truly surprising was that it soon became evident that Sir Robert was
      very wealthy&mdash;wealthy to an extraordinary and unaccountable degree;
      and this fact was made manifest, not only by his expensive style of
      living, but by his proceeding to disembarrass his property, and to
      purchase extensive estates in addition. Moreover, there could be nothing
      deceptive in these appearances, for he paid ready money for everything,
      from the most important purchase to the most trifling.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sir Robert was a remarkably agreeable man, and possessing the combined
      advantages of birth and property, he was, as a matter of course, gladly
      received into the highest society which the metropolis then commanded. It
      was thus that he became acquainted with the two beautiful Miss F&mdash;&mdash;ds,
      then among the brightest ornaments of the highest circle of Dublin
      fashion. Their family was in more than one direction allied to nobility;
      and Lady D&mdash;&mdash;, their elder sister by many years, and sometime
      married to a once well-known nobleman, was now their protectress. These
      considerations, beside the fact that the young ladies were what is usually
      termed heiresses, though not to a very great amount, secured to them a
      high position in the best society which Ireland then produced. The two
      young ladies differed strongly, alike in appearance and in character. The
      elder of the two, Emily, was generally considered the handsomer&mdash;for
      her beauty was of that impressive kind which never failed to strike even
      at the first glance, possessing as it did all the advantages of a fine
      person and a commanding carriage. The beauty of her features strikingly
      assorted in character with that of her figure and deportment. Her hair was
      raven-black and richly luxuriant, beautifully contrasting with the perfect
      whiteness of her forehead&mdash;her finely pencilled brows were black as
      the ringlets that clustered near them&mdash;and her blue eyes, full,
      lustrous, and animated, possessed all the power and brilliancy of brown
      ones, with more than their softness and variety of expression. She was
      not, however, merely the tragedy queen. When she smiled, and that was not
      seldom, the dimpling of cheek and chin, the laughing display of the small
      and beautiful teeth&mdash;but, more than all, the roguish archness of her
      deep, bright eye, showed that nature had not neglected in her the lighter
      and the softer characteristics of woman.
    </p>
    <p>
      Her younger sister Mary was, as I believe not unfrequently occurs in the
      case of sisters, quite in the opposite style of beauty. She was
      light-haired, had more colour, had nearly equal grace, with much more
      liveliness of manner. Her eyes were of that dark grey which poets so much
      admire&mdash;full of expression and vivacity. She was altogether a very
      beautiful and animated girl&mdash;though as unlike her sister as the
      presence of those two qualities would permit her to be. Their
      dissimilarity did not stop here&mdash;it was deeper than mere appearance&mdash;the
      character of their minds differed almost as strikingly as did their
      complexion. The fair-haired beauty had a large proportion of that softness
      and pliability of temper which physiognomists assign as the
      characteristics of such complexions. She was much more the creature of
      impulse than of feeling, and consequently more the victim of extrinsic
      circumstances than was her sister. Emily, on the contrary, possessed
      considerable firmness and decision. She was less excitable, but when
      excited her feelings were more intense and enduring. She wanted much of
      the gaiety, but with it the volatility of her younger sister. Her opinions
      were adopted, and her friendships formed more reflectively, and her
      affections seemed to move, as it were, more slowly, but more determinedly.
      This firmness of character did not amount to anything masculine, and did
      not at all impair the feminine grace of her manners.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sir Robert Ardagh was for a long time apparently equally attentive to the
      two sisters, and many were the conjectures and the surmises as to which
      would be the lady of his choice. At length, however, these doubts were
      determined; he proposed for and was accepted by the dark beauty, Emily F&mdash;&mdash;d.
    </p>
    <p>
      The bridals were celebrated in a manner becoming the wealth and
      connections of the parties; and Sir Robert and Lady Ardagh left Dublin to
      pass the honeymoon at the family mansion, Castle Ardagh, which had lately
      been fitted up in a style bordering upon magnificent. Whether in
      compliance with the wishes of his lady, or owing to some whim of his own,
      his habits were henceforward strikingly altered; and from having moved
      among the gayest if not the most profligate of the votaries of fashion, he
      suddenly settled down into a quiet, domestic, country gentleman, and
      seldom, if ever, visited the capital, and then his sojourns were as brief
      as the nature of his business would permit.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lady Ardagh, however, did not suffer from this change further than in
      being secluded from general society; for Sir Robert's wealth, and the
      hospitality which he had established in the family mansion, commanded that
      of such of his lady's friends and relatives as had leisure or inclination
      to visit the castle; and as their style of living was very handsome, and
      its internal resources of amusement considerable, few invitations from Sir
      Robert or his lady were neglected.
    </p>
    <p>
      Many years passed quietly away, during which Sir Robert's and Lady
      Ardagh's hopes of issue were several times disappointed. In the lapse of
      all this time there occurred but one event worth recording. Sir Robert had
      brought with him from abroad a valet, who sometimes professed himself to
      be French, at others Italian, and at others again German. He spoke all
      these languages with equal fluency, and seemed to take a kind of pleasure
      in puzzling the sagacity and balking the curiosity of such of the visitors
      at the castle as at any time happened to enter into conversation with him,
      or who, struck by his singularities, became inquisitive respecting his
      country and origin. Sir Robert called him by the French name, JACQUE, and
      among the lower orders he was familiarly known by the title of 'Jack, the
      devil,' an appellation which originated in a supposed malignity of
      disposition and a real reluctance to mix in the society of those who were
      believed to be his equals. This morose reserve, coupled with the mystery
      which enveloped all about him, rendered him an object of suspicion and
      inquiry to his fellow-servants, amongst whom it was whispered that this
      man in secret governed the actions of Sir Robert with a despotic
      dictation, and that, as if to indemnify himself for his public and
      apparent servitude and self-denial, he in private exacted a degree of
      respectful homage from his so-called master, totally inconsistent with the
      relation generally supposed to exist between them.
    </p>
    <p>
      This man's personal appearance was, to say the least of it, extremely odd;
      he was low in stature; and this defect was enhanced by a distortion of the
      spine, so considerable as almost to amount to a hunch; his features, too,
      had all that sharpness and sickliness of hue which generally accompany
      deformity; he wore his hair, which was black as soot, in heavy neglected
      ringlets about his shoulders, and always without powder&mdash;a
      peculiarity in those days. There was something unpleasant, too, in the
      circumstance that he never raised his eyes to meet those of another; this
      fact was often cited as a proof of his being something not quite right,
      and said to result not from the timidity which is supposed in most cases
      to induce this habit, but from a consciousness that his eye possessed a
      power which, if exhibited, would betray a supernatural origin. Once, and
      once only, had he violated this sinister observance: it was on the
      occasion of Sir Robert's hopes having been most bitterly disappointed; his
      lady, after a severe and dangerous confinement, gave birth to a dead
      child. Immediately after the intelligence had been made known, a servant,
      having upon some business passed outside the gate of the castle-yard, was
      met by Jacque, who, contrary to his wont, accosted him, observing, 'So,
      after all the pother, the son and heir is still-born.' This remark was
      accompanied by a chuckling laugh, the only approach to merriment which he
      was ever known to exhibit. The servant, who was really disappointed,
      having hoped for holiday times, feasting and debauchery with impunity
      during the rejoicings which would have accompanied a christening, turned
      tartly upon the little valet, telling him that he should let Sir Robert
      know how he had received the tidings which should have filled any faithful
      servant with sorrow; and having once broken the ice, he was proceeding
      with increasing fluency, when his harangue was cut short and his temerity
      punished, by the little man raising his head and treating him to a scowl
      so fearful, half-demoniac, half-insane, that it haunted his imagination in
      nightmares and nervous tremors for months after.
    </p>
    <p>
      To this man Lady Ardagh had, at first sight, conceived an antipathy
      amounting to horror, a mixture of loathing and dread so very powerful that
      she had made it a particular and urgent request to Sir Robert, that he
      would dismiss him, offering herself, from that property which Sir Robert
      had by the marriage settlements left at her own disposal, to provide
      handsomely for him, provided only she might be relieved from the continual
      anxiety and discomfort which the fear of encountering him induced.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sir Robert, however, would not hear of it; the request seemed at first to
      agitate and distress him; but when still urged in defiance of his
      peremptory refusal, he burst into a violent fit of fury; he spoke darkly
      of great sacrifices which he had made, and threatened that if the request
      were at any time renewed he would leave both her and the country for ever.
      This was, however, a solitary instance of violence; his general conduct
      towards Lady Ardagh, though at no time uxorious, was certainly kind and
      respectful, and he was more than repaid in the fervent attachment which
      she bore him in return.
    </p>
    <p>
      Some short time after this strange interview between Sir Robert and Lady
      Ardagh; one night after the family had retired to bed, and when everything
      had been quiet for some time, the bell of Sir Robert's dressing-room rang
      suddenly and violently; the ringing was repeated again and again at still
      shorter intervals, and with increasing violence, as if the person who
      pulled the bell was agitated by the presence of some terrifying and
      imminent danger. A servant named Donovan was the first to answer it; he
      threw on his clothes, and hurried to the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sir Robert had selected for his private room an apartment remote from the
      bed-chambers of the castle, most of which lay in the more modern parts of
      the mansion, and secured at its entrance by a double door. As the servant
      opened the first of these, Sir Robert's bell again sounded with a longer
      and louder peal; the inner door resisted his efforts to open it; but after
      a few violent struggles, not having been perfectly secured, or owing to
      the inadequacy of the bolt itself, it gave way, and the servant rushed
      into the apartment, advancing several paces before he could recover
      himself. As he entered, he heard Sir Robert's voice exclaiming loudly&mdash;'Wait
      without, do not come in yet;' but the prohibition came too late. Near a
      low truckle-bed, upon which Sir Robert sometimes slept, for he was a
      whimsical man, in a large armchair, sat, or rather lounged, the form of
      the valet Jacque, his arms folded, and his heels stretched forward on the
      floor, so as fully to exhibit his misshapen legs, his head thrown back,
      and his eyes fixed upon his master with a look of indescribable defiance
      and derision, while, as if to add to the strange insolence of his attitude
      and expression, he had placed upon his head the black cloth cap which it
      was his habit to wear.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sir Robert was standing before him, at the distance of several yards, in a
      posture expressive of despair, terror, and what might be called an agony
      of humility. He waved his hand twice or thrice, as if to dismiss the
      servant, who, however, remained fixed on the spot where he had first
      stood; and then, as if forgetting everything but the agony within him, he
      pressed his clenched hands on his cold damp brow, and dashed away the
      heavy drops that gathered chill and thickly there.
    </p>
    <p>
      Jacque broke the silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Donovan,' said he, 'shake up that drone and drunkard, Carlton; tell him
      that his master directs that the travelling carriage shall be at the door
      within half-an-hour.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The servant paused, as if in doubt as to what he should do; but his
      scruples were resolved by Sir Robert's saying hurriedly, 'Go&mdash;go, do
      whatever he directs; his commands are mine; tell Carlton the same.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The servant hurried to obey, and in about half-an-hour the carriage was at
      the door, and Jacque, having directed the coachman to drive to B&mdash;&mdash;n,
      a small town at about the distance of twelve miles&mdash;the nearest
      point, however, at which post-horses could be obtained&mdash;stepped into
      the vehicle, which accordingly quitted the castle immediately.
    </p>
    <p>
      Although it was a fine moonlight night, the carriage made its way but very
      slowly, and after the lapse of two hours the travellers had arrived at a
      point about eight miles from the castle, at which the road strikes through
      a desolate and heathy flat, sloping up distantly at either side into bleak
      undulatory hills, in whose monotonous sweep the imagination beholds the
      heaving of some dark sluggish sea, arrested in its first commotion by some
      preternatural power. It is a gloomy and divested spot; there is neither
      tree nor habitation near it; its monotony is unbroken, except by here and
      there the grey front of a rock peering above the heath, and the effect is
      rendered yet more dreary and spectral by the exaggerated and misty shadows
      which the moon casts along the sloping sides of the hills.
    </p>
    <p>
      When they had gained about the centre of this tract, Carlton, the
      coachman, was surprised to see a figure standing at some distance in
      advance, immediately beside the road, and still more so when, on coming
      up, he observed that it was no other than Jacque whom he believed to be at
      that moment quietly seated in the carriage; the coachman drew up, and
      nodding to him, the little valet exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Carlton, I have got the start of you; the roads are heavy, so I shall
      even take care of myself the rest of the way. Do you make your way back as
      best you can, and I shall follow my own nose.'
    </p>
    <p>
      So saying, he chucked a purse into the lap of the coachman, and turning
      off at a right angle with the road, he began to move rapidly away in the
      direction of the dark ridge that lowered in the distance.
    </p>
    <p>
      The servant watched him until he was lost in the shadowy haze of night;
      and neither he nor any of the inmates of the castle saw Jacque again. His
      disappearance, as might have been expected, did not cause any regret among
      the servants and dependants at the castle; and Lady Ardagh did not attempt
      to conceal her delight; but with Sir Robert matters were different, for
      two or three days subsequent to this event he confined himself to his
      room, and when he did return to his ordinary occupations, it was with a
      gloomy indifference, which showed that he did so more from habit than from
      any interest he felt in them. He appeared from that moment unaccountably
      and strikingly changed, and thenceforward walked through life as a thing
      from which he could derive neither profit nor pleasure. His temper,
      however, so far from growing wayward or morose, became, though gloomy,
      very&mdash;almost unnaturally&mdash;placid and cold; but his spirits
      totally failed, and he grew silent and abstracted.
    </p>
    <p>
      These sombre habits of mind, as might have been anticipated, very
      materially affected the gay house-keeping of the castle; and the dark and
      melancholy spirit of its master seemed to have communicated itself to the
      very domestics, almost to the very walls of the mansion.
    </p>
    <p>
      Several years rolled on in this way, and the sounds of mirth and wassail
      had long been strangers to the castle, when Sir Robert requested his lady,
      to her great astonishment, to invite some twenty or thirty of their
      friends to spend the Christmas, which was fast approaching, at the castle.
      Lady Ardagh gladly complied, and her sister Mary, who still continued
      unmarried, and Lady D&mdash;&mdash; were of course included in the
      invitations. Lady Ardagh had requested her sisters to set forward as early
      as possible, in order that she might enjoy a little of their society
      before the arrival of the other guests; and in compliance with this
      request they left Dublin almost immediately upon receiving the invitation,
      a little more than a week before the arrival of the festival which was to
      be the period at which the whole party were to muster.
    </p>
    <p>
      For expedition's sake it was arranged that they should post, while Lady D&mdash;&mdash;'s
      groom was to follow with her horses, she taking with herself her own maid
      and one male servant. They left the city when the day was considerably
      spent, and consequently made but three stages in the first day; upon the
      second, at about eight in the evening, they had reached the town of K&mdash;&mdash;k,
      distant about fifteen miles from Castle Ardagh. Here, owing to Miss F&mdash;&mdash;d's
      great fatigue, she having been for a considerable time in a very delicate
      state of health, it was determined to put up for the night. They,
      accordingly, took possession of the best sitting-room which the inn
      commanded, and Lady D&mdash;&mdash;remained in it to direct and urge the
      preparations for some refreshment, which the fatigues of the day had
      rendered necessary, while her younger sister retired to her bed-chamber to
      rest there for a little time, as the parlour commanded no such luxury as a
      sofa.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss F&mdash;&mdash;d was, as I have already stated, at this time in very
      delicate health; and upon this occasion the exhaustion of fatigue, and the
      dreary badness of the weather, combined to depress her spirits. Lady D&mdash;&mdash;
      had not been left long to herself, when the door communicating with the
      passage was abruptly opened, and her sister Mary entered in a state of
      great agitation; she sat down pale and trembling upon one of the chairs,
      and it was not until a copious flood of tears had relieved her, that she
      became sufficiently calm to relate the cause of her excitement and
      distress. It was simply this. Almost immediately upon lying down upon the
      bed she sank into a feverish and unrefreshing slumber; images of all
      grotesque shapes and startling colours flitted before her sleeping fancy
      with all the rapidity and variety of the changes in a kaleidoscope. At
      length, as she described it, a mist seemed to interpose itself between her
      sight and the ever-shifting scenery which sported before her imagination,
      and out of this cloudy shadow gradually emerged a figure whose back seemed
      turned towards the sleeper; it was that of a lady, who, in perfect
      silence, was expressing as far as pantomimic gesture could, by wringing
      her hands, and throwing her head from side to side, in the manner of one
      who is exhausted by the over indulgence, by the very sickness and
      impatience of grief; the extremity of misery. For a long time she sought
      in vain to catch a glimpse of the face of the apparition, who thus seemed
      to stir and live before her. But at length the figure seemed to move with
      an air of authority, as if about to give directions to some inferior, and
      in doing so, it turned its head so as to display, with a ghastly
      distinctness, the features of Lady Ardagh, pale as death, with her dark
      hair all dishevelled, and her eyes dim and sunken with weeping. The
      revulsion of feeling which Miss F&mdash;&mdash;d experienced at this
      disclosure&mdash;for up to that point she had contemplated the appearance
      rather with a sense of curiosity and of interest, than of anything deeper&mdash;was
      so horrible, that the shock awoke her perfectly. She sat up in the bed,
      and looked fearfully around the room, which was imperfectly lighted by a
      single candle burning dimly, as if she almost expected to see the reality
      of her dreadful vision lurking in some corner of the chamber. Her fears
      were, however, verified, though not in the way she expected; yet in a
      manner sufficiently horrible&mdash;for she had hardly time to breathe and
      to collect her thoughts, when she heard, or thought she heard, the voice
      of her sister, Lady Ardagh, sometimes sobbing violently, and sometimes
      almost shrieking as if in terror, and calling upon her and Lady D&mdash;&mdash;,
      with the most imploring earnestness of despair, for God's sake to lose no
      time in coming to her. All this was so horribly distinct, that it seemed
      as if the mourner was standing within a few yards of the spot where Miss F&mdash;&mdash;d
      lay. She sprang from the bed, and leaving the candle in the room behind
      her, she made her way in the dark through the passage, the voice still
      following her, until as she arrived at the door of the sitting-room it
      seemed to die away in low sobbing.
    </p>
    <p>
      As soon as Miss F&mdash;&mdash;d was tolerably recovered, she declared her
      determination to proceed directly, and without further loss of time, to
      Castle Ardagh. It was not without much difficulty that Lady D&mdash;&mdash;
      at length prevailed upon her to consent to remain where they then were,
      until morning should arrive, when it was to be expected that the young
      lady would be much refreshed by at least remaining quiet for the night,
      even though sleep were out of the question. Lady D&mdash;&mdash; was
      convinced, from the nervous and feverish symptoms which her sister
      exhibited, that she had already done too much, and was more than ever
      satisfied of the necessity of prosecuting the journey no further upon that
      day. After some time she persuaded her sister to return to her room, where
      she remained with her until she had gone to bed, and appeared
      comparatively composed. Lady D&mdash;&mdash; then returned to the parlour,
      and not finding herself sleepy, she remained sitting by the fire. Her
      solitude was a second time broken in upon, by the entrance of her sister,
      who now appeared, if possible, more agitated than before. She said that
      Lady D&mdash;&mdash; had not long left the room, when she was roused by a
      repetition of the same wailing and lamentations, accompanied by the
      wildest and most agonized supplications that no time should be lost in
      coming to Castle Ardagh, and all in her sister's voice, and uttered at the
      same proximity as before. This time the voice had followed her to the very
      door of the sitting-room, and until she closed it, seemed to pour forth
      its cries and sobs at the very threshold.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miss F&mdash;&mdash;d now most positively declared that nothing should
      prevent her proceeding instantly to the castle, adding that if Lady D&mdash;&mdash;
      would not accompany her, she would go on by herself. Superstitious
      feelings are at all times more or less contagious, and the last century
      afforded a soil much more congenial to their growth than the present. Lady
      D&mdash;&mdash; was so far affected by her sister's terrors, that she
      became, at least, uneasy; and seeing that her sister was immovably
      determined upon setting forward immediately, she consented to accompany
      her forthwith. After a slight delay, fresh horses were procured, and the
      two ladies and their attendants renewed their journey, with strong
      injunctions to the driver to quicken their rate of travelling as much as
      possible, and promises of reward in case of his doing so.
    </p>
    <p>
      Roads were then in much worse condition throughout the south, even than
      they now are; and the fifteen miles which modern posting would have passed
      in little more than an hour and a half, were not completed even with every
      possible exertion in twice the time. Miss F&mdash;&mdash;d had been
      nervously restless during the journey. Her head had been constantly out of
      the carriage window; and as they approached the entrance to the castle
      demesne, which lay about a mile from the building, her anxiety began to
      communicate itself to her sister. The postillion had just dismounted, and
      was endeavouring to open the gate&mdash;at that time a necessary trouble;
      for in the middle of the last century porter's lodges were not common in
      the south of Ireland, and locks and keys almost unknown. He had just
      succeeded in rolling back the heavy oaken gate so as to admit the vehicle,
      when a mounted servant rode rapidly down the avenue, and drawing up at the
      carriage, asked of the postillion who the party were; and on hearing, he
      rode round to the carriage window and handed in a note, which Lady D&mdash;&mdash;
      received. By the assistance of one of the coach-lamps they succeeded in
      deciphering it. It was scrawled in great agitation, and ran thus:
    </p>
    <p>
      'MY DEAR SISTER&mdash;MY DEAR SISTERS BOTH,&mdash;In God's name lose no
      time, I am frightened and miserable; I cannot explain all till you come. I
      am too much terrified to write coherently; but understand me&mdash;hasten&mdash;do
      not waste a minute. I am afraid you will come too late.
    </p>
    <p>
      'E. A.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The servant could tell nothing more than that the castle was in great
      confusion, and that Lady Ardagh had been crying bitterly all the night.
      Sir Robert was perfectly well. Altogether at a loss as to the cause of
      Lady Ardagh's great distress, they urged their way up the steep and broken
      avenue which wound through the crowding trees, whose wild and grotesque
      branches, now left stripped and naked by the blasts of winter, stretched
      drearily across the road. As the carriage drew up in the area before the
      door, the anxiety of the ladies almost amounted to agony; and scarcely
      waiting for the assistance of their attendant, they sprang to the ground,
      and in an instant stood at the castle door. From within were distinctly
      audible the sounds of lamentation and weeping, and the suppressed hum of
      voices as if of those endeavouring to soothe the mourner. The door was
      speedily opened, and when the ladies entered, the first object which met
      their view was their sister, Lady Ardagh, sitting on a form in the hall,
      weeping and wringing her hands in deep agony. Beside her stood two old,
      withered crones, who were each endeavouring in their own way to administer
      consolation, without even knowing or caring what the subject of her grief
      might be.
    </p>
    <p>
      Immediately on Lady Ardagh's seeing her sisters, she started up, fell on
      their necks, and kissed them again and again without speaking, and then
      taking them each by a hand, still weeping bitterly, she led them into a
      small room adjoining the hall, in which burned a light, and, having closed
      the door, she sat down between them. After thanking them for the haste
      they had made, she proceeded to tell them, in words incoherent from
      agitation, that Sir Robert had in private, and in the most solemn manner,
      told her that he should die upon that night, and that he had occupied
      himself during the evening in giving minute directions respecting the
      arrangements of his funeral. Lady D&mdash;&mdash; here suggested the
      possibility of his labouring under the hallucinations of a fever; but to
      this Lady Ardagh quickly replied:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh! no, no! Would to God I could think it. Oh! no, no! Wait till you have
      seen him. There is a frightful calmness about all he says and does; and
      his directions are all so clear, and his mind so perfectly collected, it
      is impossible, quite impossible.' And she wept yet more bitterly.
    </p>
    <p>
      At that moment Sir Robert's voice was heard in issuing some directions, as
      he came downstairs; and Lady Ardagh exclaimed, hurriedly:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Go now and see him yourself. He is in the hall.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Lady D&mdash;&mdash; accordingly went out into the hall, where Sir Robert
      met her; and, saluting her with kind politeness, he said, after a pause:
    </p>
    <p>
      'You are come upon a melancholy mission&mdash;the house is in great
      confusion, and some of its inmates in considerable grief.' He took her
      hand, and looking fixedly in her face, continued: 'I shall not live to see
      to-morrow's sun shine.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'You are ill, sir, I have no doubt,' replied she; 'but I am very certain
      we shall see you much better to-morrow, and still better the day
      following.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I am NOT ill, sister,' replied he. 'Feel my temples, they are cool; lay
      your finger to my pulse, its throb is slow and temperate. I never was more
      perfectly in health, and yet do I know that ere three hours be past, I
      shall be no more.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Sir, sir,' said she, a good deal startled, but wishing to conceal the
      impression which the calm solemnity of his manner had, in her own despite,
      made upon her, 'Sir, you should not jest; you should not even speak
      lightly upon such subjects. You trifle with what is sacred&mdash;you are
      sporting with the best affections of your wife&mdash;&mdash;'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Stay, my good lady,' said he; 'if when this clock shall strike the hour
      of three, I shall be anything but a helpless clod, then upbraid me. Pray
      return now to your sister. Lady Ardagh is, indeed, much to be pitied; but
      what is past cannot now be helped. I have now a few papers to arrange, and
      some to destroy. I shall see you and Lady Ardagh before my death; try to
      compose her&mdash;her sufferings distress me much; but what is past cannot
      now be mended.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus saying, he went upstairs, and Lady D&mdash;&mdash; returned to the
      room where her sisters were sitting.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well,' exclaimed Lady Ardagh, as she re-entered, 'is it not so?&mdash;do
      you still doubt?&mdash;do you think there is any hope?'
    </p>
    <p>
      Lady D&mdash;&mdash; was silent.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh! none, none, none,' continued she; 'I see, I see you are convinced.'
      And she wrung her hands in bitter agony.
    </p>
    <p>
      'My dear sister,' said Lady D&mdash;&mdash;, 'there is, no doubt,
      something strange in all that has appeared in this matter; but still I
      cannot but hope that there may be something deceptive in all the apparent
      calmness of Sir Robert. I still must believe that some latent fever has
      affected his mind, or that, owing to the state of nervous depression into
      which he has been sinking, some trivial occurrence has been converted, in
      his disordered imagination, into an augury foreboding his immediate
      dissolution.'
    </p>
    <p>
      In such suggestions, unsatisfactory even to those who originated them, and
      doubly so to her whom they were intended to comfort, more than two hours
      passed; and Lady D&mdash;&mdash; was beginning to hope that the fated term
      might elapse without the occurrence of any tragical event, when Sir Robert
      entered the room. On coming in, he placed his finger with a warning
      gesture upon his lips, as if to enjoin silence; and then having
      successively pressed the hands of his two sisters-in-law, he stooped sadly
      over the fainting form of his lady, and twice pressed her cold, pale
      forehead, with his lips, and then passed silently out of the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lady D&mdash;&mdash;, starting up, followed to the door, and saw him take
      a candle in the hall, and walk deliberately up the stairs. Stimulated by a
      feeling of horrible curiosity, she continued to follow him at a distance.
      She saw him enter his own private room, and heard him close and lock the
      door after him. Continuing to follow him as far as she could, she placed
      herself at the door of the chamber, as noiselessly as possible, where
      after a little time she was joined by her two sisters, Lady Ardagh and
      Miss F&mdash;&mdash;d. In breathless silence they listened to what should
      pass within. They distinctly heard Sir Robert pacing up and down the room
      for some time; and then, after a pause, a sound as if some one had thrown
      himself heavily upon the bed. At this moment Lady D&mdash;&mdash;,
      forgetting that the door had been secured within, turned the handle for
      the purpose of entering; when some one from the inside, close to the door,
      said, 'Hush! hush!' The same lady, now much alarmed, knocked violently at
      the door; there was no answer. She knocked again more violently, with no
      further success. Lady Ardagh, now uttering a piercing shriek, sank in a
      swoon upon the floor. Three or four servants, alarmed by the noise, now
      hurried upstairs, and Lady Ardagh was carried apparently lifeless to her
      own chamber. They then, after having knocked long and loudly in vain,
      applied themselves to forcing an entrance into Sir Robert's room. After
      resisting some violent efforts, the door at length gave way, and all
      entered the room nearly together. There was a single candle burning upon a
      table at the far end of the apartment; and stretched upon the bed lay Sir
      Robert Ardagh. He was a corpse&mdash;the eyes were open&mdash;no
      convulsion had passed over the features, or distorted the limbs&mdash;it
      seemed as if the soul had sped from the body without a struggle to remain
      there. On touching the body it was found to be cold as clay&mdash;all
      lingering of the vital heat had left it. They closed the ghastly eyes of
      the corpse, and leaving it to the care of those who seem to consider it a
      privilege of their age and sex to gloat over the revolting spectacle of
      death in all its stages, they returned to Lady Ardagh, now a widow. The
      party assembled at the castle, but the atmosphere was tainted with death.
      Grief there was not much, but awe and panic were expressed in every face.
      The guests talked in whispers, and the servants walked on tiptoe, as if
      afraid of the very noise of their own footsteps.
    </p>
    <p>
      The funeral was conducted almost with splendour. The body, having been
      conveyed, in compliance with Sir Robert's last directions, to Dublin, was
      there laid within the ancient walls of St. Audoen's Church&mdash;where I
      have read the epitaph, telling the age and titles of the departed dust.
      Neither painted escutcheon, nor marble slab, have served to rescue from
      oblivion the story of the dead, whose very name will ere long moulder from
      their tracery,
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
          'Et sunt sua fata sepulchris.'(1)
</pre>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     (1) This prophecy has since been realised; for the aisle in
     which Sir Robert's remains were laid has been suffered to
     fall completely to decay; and the tomb which marked his
     grave, and other monuments more curious, form now one
     indistinguishable mass of rubbish.
</pre>
    <p>
      The events which I have recorded are not imaginary. They are FACTS; and
      there lives one whose authority none would venture to question, who could
      vindicate the accuracy of every statement which I have set down, and that,
      too, with all the circumstantiality of an eye-witness.(2)
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     (2) This paper, from a memorandum, I find to have been
     written in 1803. The lady to whom allusion is made, I
     believe to be Miss Mary F&mdash;&mdash;d. She never married, and
     survived both her sisters, living to a very advanced age.
</pre>
    <h2>
      THE LAST HEIR OF CASTLE CONNOR.
    </h2>
    <p>
      Being a third Extract from the legacy of the late Francis Purcell, P. P.
      of Drumcoolagh.
    </p>
    <p>
      There is something in the decay of ancient grandeur to interest even the
      most unconcerned spectator&mdash;the evidences of greatness, of power, and
      of pride that survive the wreck of time, proving, in mournful contrast
      with present desolation and decay, what WAS in other days, appeal, with a
      resistless power, to the sympathies of our nature. And when, as we gaze on
      the scion of some ruined family, the first impulse of nature that bids us
      regard his fate with interest and respect is justified by the recollection
      of great exertions and self-devotion and sacrifices in the cause of a lost
      country and of a despised religion&mdash;sacrifices and efforts made with
      all the motives of faithfulness and of honour, and terminating in ruin&mdash;in
      such a case respect becomes veneration, and the interest we feel amounts
      almost to a passion.
    </p>
    <p>
      It is this feeling which has thrown the magic veil of romance over every
      roofless castle and ruined turret throughout our country; it is this
      feeling that, so long as a tower remains above the level of the soil, so
      long as one scion of a prostrate and impoverished family survives, will
      never suffer Ireland to yield to the stranger more than the 'mouth honour'
      which fear compels.(3) I who have conversed viva voce et propria persona
      with those whose recollections could run back so far as the times previous
      to the confiscations which followed the Revolution of 1688&mdash;whose
      memory could repeople halls long roofless and desolate, and point out the
      places where greatness once had been, may feel all this more strongly, and
      with a more vivid interest, than can those whose sympathies are awakened
      by the feebler influence of what may be called the PICTURESQUE effects of
      ruin and decay.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     (3) This passage serves (mirabile dictu) to corroborate a
     statement of Mr. O'Connell's, which occurs in his evidence
     given before the House of Commons, wherein he affirms that
     the principles of the Irish priesthood 'ARE democratic, and
     were those of Jacobinism.'&mdash;See digest of the evidence upon
     the state of Ireland, given before the House of Commons.
</pre>
    <p>
      There do, indeed, still exist some fragments of the ancient Catholic
      families of Ireland; but, alas! what VERY fragments! They linger like the
      remnants of her aboriginal forests, reft indeed of their strength and
      greatness, but proud even in decay. Every winter thins their ranks, and
      strews the ground with the wreck of their loftiest branches; they are at
      best but tolerated in the land which gave them birth&mdash;objects of
      curiosity, perhaps of pity, to one class, but of veneration to another.
    </p>
    <p>
      The O'Connors, of Castle Connor, were an ancient Irish family. The name
      recurs frequently in our history, and is generally to be found in a
      prominent place whenever periods of tumult or of peril called forth the
      courage and the enterprise of this country. After the accession of William
      III., the storm of confiscation which swept over the land made woeful
      havoc in their broad domains. Some fragments of property, however, did
      remain to them, and with it the building which had for ages formed the
      family residence.
    </p>
    <p>
      About the year 17&mdash;, my uncle, a Catholic priest, became acquainted
      with the inmates of Castle Connor, and after a time introduced me, then a
      lad of about fifteen, full of spirits, and little dreaming that a
      profession so grave as his should ever become mine.
    </p>
    <p>
      The family at that time consisted of but two members, a widow lady and her
      only son, a young man aged about eighteen. In our early days the progress
      from acquaintance to intimacy, and from intimacy to friendship is
      proverbially rapid; and young O'Connor and I became, in less than a month,
      close and confidential companions&mdash;an intercourse which ripened
      gradually into an attachment ardent, deep, and devoted&mdash;such as I
      believe young hearts only are capable of forming.
    </p>
    <p>
      He had been left early fatherless, and the representative and heir of his
      family. His mother's affection for him was intense in proportion as there
      existed no other object to divide it&mdash;indeed&mdash;such love as that
      she bore him I have never seen elsewhere. Her love was better bestowed
      than that of mothers generally is, for young O'Connor, not without some of
      the faults, had certainly many of the most engaging qualities of youth. He
      had all the frankness and gaiety which attract, and the generosity of
      heart which confirms friendship; indeed, I never saw a person so
      universally popular; his very faults seemed to recommend him; he was wild,
      extravagant, thoughtless, and fearlessly adventurous&mdash;defects of
      character which, among the peasantry of Ireland, are honoured as virtues.
      The combination of these qualities, and the position which O'Connor
      occupied as representative of an ancient Irish Catholic family&mdash;a
      peculiarly interesting one to me, one of the old faith&mdash;endeared him
      to me so much that I have never felt the pangs of parting more keenly than
      when it became necessary, for the finishing of his education, that he
      should go abroad.
    </p>
    <p>
      Three years had passed away before I saw him again. During the interval,
      however, I had frequently heard from him, so that absence had not abated
      the warmth of our attachment. Who could tell of the rejoicings that marked
      the evening of his return? The horses were removed from the chaise at the
      distance of a mile from the castle, while it and its contents were borne
      rapidly onward almost by the pressure of the multitude, like a log upon a
      torrent. Bonfires blared far and near&mdash;bagpipes roared and fiddles
      squeaked; and, amid the thundering shouts of thousands, the carriage drew
      up before the castle.
    </p>
    <p>
      In an instant young O'Connor was upon the ground, crying, 'Thank you, boys&mdash;thank
      you, boys;' while a thousand hands were stretched out from all sides to
      grasp even a finger of his. Still, amid shouts of 'God bless your honour&mdash;long
      may you reign!' and 'Make room there, boys! clear the road for the
      masther!' he reached the threshold of the castle, where stood his mother
      weeping for joy.
    </p>
    <p>
      Oh! who could describe that embrace, or the enthusiasm with which it was
      witnessed? 'God bless him to you, my lady&mdash;glory to ye both!' and
      'Oh, but he is a fine young gentleman, God bless him!' resounded on all
      sides, while hats flew up in volleys that darkened the moon; and when at
      length, amid the broad delighted grins of the thronging domestics, whose
      sense of decorum precluded any more boisterous evidence of joy, they
      reached the parlour, then giving way to the fulness of her joy the widowed
      mother kissed and blessed him and wept in turn. Well might any parent be
      proud to claim as son the handsome stripling who now represented the
      Castle Connor family; but to her his beauty had a peculiar charm, for it
      bore a striking resemblance to that of her husband, the last O'Connor.
    </p>
    <p>
      I know not whether partiality blinded me, or that I did no more than
      justice to my friend in believing that I had never seen so handsome a
      young man. I am inclined to think the latter. He was rather tall, very
      slightly and elegantly made; his face was oval, and his features decidedly
      Spanish in cast and complexion, but with far more vivacity of expression
      than generally belongs to the beauty of that nation. The extreme delicacy
      of his features and the varied animation of his countenance made him
      appear even younger than his years&mdash;an illusion which the total
      absence of everything studied in his manners seemed to confirm. Time had
      wrought no small change in me, alike in mind and spirits; but in the case
      of O'Connor it seemed to have lost its power to alter. His gaiety was
      undamped, his generosity unchilled; and though the space which had
      intervened between our parting and reunion was but brief, yet at the
      period of life at which we were, even a shorter interval than that of
      three years has frequently served to form or DEform a character.
    </p>
    <p>
      Weeks had passed away since the return of O'Connor, and scarce a day had
      elapsed without my seeing him, when the neighbourhood was thrown into an
      unusual state of excitement by the announcement of a race-ball to be
      celebrated at the assembly-room of the town of T&mdash;&mdash;, distant
      scarcely two miles from Castle Connor.
    </p>
    <p>
      Young O'Connor, as I had expected, determined at once to attend it; and
      having directed in vain all the powers of his rhetoric to persuade his
      mother to accompany him, he turned the whole battery of his logic upon me,
      who, at that time, felt a reluctance stronger than that of mere apathy to
      mixing in any of these scenes of noisy pleasure for which for many reasons
      I felt myself unfitted. He was so urgent and persevering, however, that I
      could not refuse; and I found myself reluctantly obliged to make up my
      mind to attend him upon the important night to the spacious but
      ill-finished building, which the fashion and beauty of the county were
      pleased to term an assembly-room.
    </p>
    <p>
      When we entered the apartment, we found a select few, surrounded by a
      crowd of spectators, busily performing a minuet, with all the congees and
      flourishes which belonged to that courtly dance; and my companion,
      infected by the contagion of example, was soon, as I had anticipated,
      waving his chapeau bras, and gracefully bowing before one of the prettiest
      girls in the room. I had neither skill nor spirits to qualify me to follow
      his example; and as the fulness of the room rendered it easy to do so
      without its appearing singular, I determined to be merely a spectator of
      the scene which surrounded me, without taking an active part in its
      amusements.
    </p>
    <p>
      The room was indeed very much crowded, so that its various groups, formed
      as design or accident had thrown the parties together, afforded no small
      fund of entertainment to the contemplative observer. There were the
      dancers, all gaiety and good-humour; a little further off were the tables
      at which sat the card-players, some plying their vocation with deep and
      silent anxiety&mdash;for in those days gaming often ran very high in such
      places&mdash;and others disputing with all the vociferous pertinacity of
      undisguised ill-temper. There, again, were the sallow, blue-nosed,
      grey-eyed dealers in whispered scandal; and, in short, there is scarcely a
      group or combination to be met with in the court of kings which might not
      have found a humble parallel in the assembly-room of T&mdash;&mdash;.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was allowed to indulge in undisturbed contemplation, for I suppose I was
      not known to more than five or six in the room. I thus had leisure not
      only to observe the different classes into which the company had divided
      itself, but to amuse myself by speculating as to the rank and character of
      many of the individual actors in the drama.
    </p>
    <p>
      Among many who have long since passed from my memory, one person for some
      time engaged my attention, and that person, for many reasons, I shall not
      soon forget. He was a tall, square-shouldered man, who stood in a careless
      attitude, leaning with his back to the wall; he seemed to have secluded
      himself from the busy multitudes which moved noisily and gaily around him,
      and nobody seemed to observe or to converse with him. He was fashionably
      dressed, but perhaps rather extravagantly; his face was full and heavy,
      expressive of sullenness and stupidity, and marked with the lines of
      strong vulgarity; his age might be somewhere between forty and fifty. Such
      as I have endeavoured to describe him, he remained motionless, his arms
      doggedly folded across his broad chest, and turning his sullen eyes from
      corner to corner of the room, as if eager to detect some object on which
      to vent his ill-humour.
    </p>
    <p>
      It is strange, and yet it is true, that one sometimes finds even in the
      most commonplace countenance an undefinable something, which fascinates
      the attention, and forces it to recur again and again, while it is
      impossible to tell whether the peculiarity which thus attracts us lies in
      feature or in expression, or in both combined, and why it is that our
      observation should be engrossed by an object which, when analysed, seems
      to possess no claim to interest or even to notice. This unaccountable
      feeling I have often experienced, and I believe I am not singular. but
      never in so remarkable a degree as upon this occasion. My friend O'Connor,
      having disposed of his fair partner, was crossing the room for the purpose
      of joining me, in doing which I was surprised to see him exchange a
      familiar, almost a cordial, greeting with the object of my curiosity. I
      say I was surprised, for independent of his very questionable appearance,
      it struck me as strange that though so constantly associated with
      O'Connor, and, as I thought, personally acquainted with all his intimates,
      I had never before even seen this individual. I did not fail immediately
      to ask him who this gentleman was. I thought he seemed slightly
      embarrassed, but after a moment's pause he laughingly said that his friend
      over the way was too mysterious a personage to have his name announced in
      so giddy a scene as the present; but that on the morrow he would furnish
      me with all the information which I could desire. There was, I thought, in
      his affected jocularity a real awkwardness which appeared to me
      unaccountable, and consequently increased my curiosity; its gratification,
      however, I was obliged to defer. At length, wearied with witnessing
      amusements in which I could not sympathise, I left the room, and did not
      see O'Connor until late in the next day.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had ridden down towards the castle for the purpose of visiting the
      O'Connors, and had nearly reached the avenue leading to the mansion, when
      I met my friend. He was also mounted; and having answered my inquiries
      respecting his mother, he easily persuaded me to accompany him in his
      ramble. We had chatted as usual for some time, when, after a pause,
      O'Connor said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'By the way, Purcell, you expressed some curiosity respecting the tall,
      handsome fellow to whom I spoke last night.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I certainly did question you about a TALL gentleman, but was not aware of
      his claims to beauty,' replied I.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, that is as it may be,' said he; 'the ladies think him handsome, and
      their opinion upon that score is more valuable than yours or mine. Do you
      know,' he continued, 'I sometimes feel half sorry that I ever made the
      fellow's acquaintance: he is quite a marked man here, and they tell
      stories of him that are anything but reputable, though I am sure without
      foundation. I think I know enough about him to warrant me in saying so.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'May I ask his name?' inquired I.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh! did not I tell you his name?' rejoined he. 'You should have heard
      that first; he and his name are equally well known. You will recognise the
      individual at once when I tell you that his name is&mdash;Fitzgerald.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Fitzgerald!' I repeated. 'Fitzgerald!&mdash;can it be Fitzgerald the
      duellist?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Upon my word you have hit it,' replied he, laughing; 'but you have
      accompanied the discovery with a look of horror more tragic than
      appropriate. He is not the monster you take him for&mdash;he has a good
      deal of old Irish pride; his temper is hasty, and he has been
      unfortunately thrown in the way of men who have not made allowance for
      these things. I am convinced that in every case in which Fitzgerald has
      fought, if the truth could be discovered, he would be found to have acted
      throughout upon the defensive. No man is mad enough to risk his own life,
      except when the doing so is an alternative to submitting tamely to what he
      considers an insult. I am certain that no man ever engaged in a duel under
      the consciousness that he had acted an intentionally aggressive part.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'When did you make his acquaintance?' said I.
    </p>
    <p>
      'About two years ago,' he replied. 'I met him in France, and you know when
      one is abroad it is an ungracious task to reject the advances of one's
      countryman, otherwise I think I should have avoided his society&mdash;less
      upon my own account than because I am sure the acquaintance would be a
      source of continual though groundless uneasiness to my mother. I know,
      therefore, that you will not unnecessarily mention its existence to her.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I gave him the desired assurance, and added:
    </p>
    <p>
      'May I ask you. O'Connor, if, indeed, it be a fair question, whether this
      Fitzgerald at any time attempted to engage you in anything like gaming?'
    </p>
    <p>
      This question was suggested by my having frequently heard Fitzgerald
      mentioned as a noted gambler, and sometimes even as a blackleg. O'Connor
      seemed, I thought, slightly embarrassed. He answered:
    </p>
    <p>
      'No, no&mdash;I cannot say that he ever attempted anything of the kind. I
      certainly have played with him, but never lost to any serious amount; nor
      can I recollect that he ever solicited me&mdash;indeed he knows that I
      have a strong objection to deep play. YOU must be aware that my finances
      could not bear much pruning down. I never lost more to him at a sitting
      than about five pounds, which you know is nothing. No, you wrong him if
      you imagine that he attached himself to me merely for the sake of such
      contemptible winnings as those which a broken-down Irish gentleman could
      afford him. Come, Purcell, you are too hard upon him&mdash;you judge only
      by report; you must see him, and decide for yourself.&mdash;Suppose we
      call upon him now; he is at the inn, in the High Street, not a mile off.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I declined the proposal drily.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Your caution is too easily alarmed,' said he. 'I do not wish you to make
      this man your bosom friend: I merely desire that you should see and speak
      to him, and if you form any acquaintance with him, it must be of that
      slight nature which can be dropped or continued at pleasure.'
    </p>
    <p>
      From the time that O'Connor had announced the fact that his friend was no
      other than the notorious Fitzgerald, a foreboding of something calamitous
      had come upon me, and it now occurred to me that if any unpleasantness
      were to be feared as likely to result to O'Connor from their connection, I
      might find my attempts to extricate him much facilitated by my being
      acquainted, however slightly, with Fitzgerald. I know not whether the idea
      was reasonable&mdash;it was certainly natural; and I told O'Connor that
      upon second thoughts I would ride down with him to the town, and wait upon
      Mr. Fitzgerald.
    </p>
    <p>
      We found him at home; and chatted with him for a considerable time. To my
      surprise his manners were perfectly those of a gentleman, and his
      conversation, if not peculiarly engaging, was certainly amusing. The
      politeness of his demeanour, and the easy fluency with which he told his
      stories and his anecdotes, many of them curious, and all more or less
      entertaining, accounted to my mind at once for the facility with which he
      had improved his acquaintance with O'Connor; and when he pressed upon us
      an invitation to sup with him that night, I had almost joined O'Connor in
      accepting it. I determined, however, against doing so, for I had no wish
      to be on terms of familiarity with Mr. Fitzgerald; and I knew that one
      evening spent together as he proposed would go further towards
      establishing an intimacy between us than fifty morning visits could do.
      When I arose to depart, it was with feelings almost favourable to
      Fitzgerald; indeed I was more than half ashamed to acknowledge to my
      companion how complete a revolution in my opinion respecting his friend
      half an hour's conversation with him had wrought. His appearance certainly
      WAS against him; but then, under the influence of his manner, one lost
      sight of much of its ungainliness, and of nearly all its vulgarity; and,
      on the whole, I felt convinced that report had done him grievous wrong,
      inasmuch as anybody, by an observance of the common courtesies of society,
      might easily avoid coming into personal collision with a gentleman so
      studiously polite as Fitzgerald. At parting, O'Connor requested me to call
      upon him the next day, as he intended to make trial of the merits of a
      pair of greyhounds, which he had thoughts of purchasing; adding, that if
      he could escape in anything like tolerable time from Fitzgerald's
      supper-party, he would take the field soon after ten on the next morning.
      At the appointed hour, or perhaps a little later, I dismounted at Castle
      Connor; and, on entering the hall, I observed a gentleman issuing from
      O'Connor's private room. I recognised him, as he approached, as a Mr.
      M'Donough, and, being but slightly acquainted with him, was about to pass
      him with a bow, when he stopped me. There was something in his manner
      which struck me as odd; he seemed a good deal flurried if not agitated,
      and said, in a hurried tone:
    </p>
    <p>
      'This is a very foolish business, Mr. Purcell. You have some influence
      with my friend O'Connor; I hope you can induce him to adopt some more
      moderate line of conduct than that he has decided upon. If you will allow
      me, I will return for a moment with you, and talk over the matter again
      with O'Connor.'
    </p>
    <p>
      As M'Donough uttered these words, I felt that sudden sinking of the heart
      which accompanies the immediate anticipation of something dreaded and
      dreadful. I was instantly convinced that O'Connor had quarrelled with
      Fitzgerald, and I knew that if such were the case, nothing short of a
      miracle could extricate him from the consequences. I signed to M'Donough
      to lead the way, and we entered the little study together. O'Connor was
      standing with his back to the fire; on the table lay the breakfast-things
      in the disorder in which a hurried meal had left them; and on another
      smaller table, placed near the hearth, lay pen, ink, and paper. As soon as
      O'Connor saw me, he came forward and shook me cordially by the hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      'My dear Purcell,' said he, 'you are the very man I wanted. I have got
      into an ugly scrape, and I trust to my friends to get me out of it.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'You have had no dispute with that man&mdash;that Fitzgerald, I hope,'
      said I, giving utterance to the conjecture whose truth I most dreaded.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Faith, I cannot say exactly what passed between us,' said he, 'inasmuch
      as I was at the time nearly half seas over; but of this much I am certain,
      that we exchanged angry words last night. I lost my temper most
      confoundedly; but, as well as I can recollect, he appeared perfectly cool
      and collected. What he said was, therefore, deliberately said, and on that
      account must be resented.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'My dear O'Connor, are you mad?' I exclaimed. 'Why will you seek to drive
      to a deadly issue a few hasty words, uttered under the influence of wine,
      and forgotten almost as soon as uttered? A quarrel with Fitzgerald it is
      twenty chances to one would terminate fatally to you.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'It is exactly because Fitzgerald IS such an accomplished shot,' said he,
      'that I become liable to the most injurious and intolerable suspicions if
      I submit to anything from him which could be construed into an affront;
      and for that reason Fitzgerald is the very last man to whom I would
      concede an inch in a case of honour.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I do not require you to make any, the slightest sacrifice of what you
      term your honour,' I replied; 'but if you have actually written a
      challenge to Fitzgerald, as I suspect you have done, I conjure you to
      reconsider the matter before you despatch it. From all that I have heard
      you say, Fitzgerald has more to complain of in the altercation which has
      taken place than you. You owe it to your only surviving parent not to
      thrust yourself thus wantonly upon&mdash;I will say it, the most appalling
      danger. Nobody, my dear O'Connor, can have a doubt of your courage; and if
      at any time, which God forbid, you shall be called upon thus to risk your
      life, you should have it in your power to enter the field under the
      consciousness that you have acted throughout temperately and like a man,
      and not, as I fear you now would do, having rashly and most causelessly
      endangered your own life and that of your friend.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I believe, Purcell, your are right,' said he. 'I believe I HAVE viewed
      the matter in too decided a light; my note, I think, scarcely allows him
      an honourable alternative, and that is certainly going a step too far&mdash;further
      than I intended. Mr. M'Donough, I'll thank you to hand me the note.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He broke the seal, and, casting his eye hastily over it, he continued:
    </p>
    <p>
      'It is, indeed, a monument of folly. I am very glad, Purcell, you happened
      to come in, otherwise it would have reached its destination by this time.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He threw it into the fire; and, after a moment's pause, resumed:
    </p>
    <p>
      'You must not mistake me, however. I am perfectly satisfied as to the
      propriety, nay, the necessity, of communicating with Fitzgerald. The
      difficulty is in what tone I should address him. I cannot say that the man
      directly affronted me&mdash;I cannot recollect any one expression which I
      could lay hold upon as offensive&mdash;but his language was ambiguous, and
      admitted frequently of the most insulting construction, and his manner
      throughout was insupportably domineering. I know it impressed me with the
      idea that he presumed upon his reputation as a DEAD SHOT, and that would
      be utterly unendurable.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I would now recommend, as I have already done,' said M'Donough, 'that if
      you write to Fitzgerald, it should be in such a strain as to leave him at
      perfect liberty, without a compromise of honour, in a friendly way, to
      satisfy your doubts as to his conduct.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I seconded the proposal warmly, and O'Connor, in a few minutes, finished a
      note, which he desired us to read. It was to this effect:
    </p>
    <p>
      'O'Connor, of Castle Connor, feeling that some expressions employed by Mr.
      Fitzgerald upon last night, admitted of a construction offensive to him,
      and injurious to his character, requests to know whether Mr. Fitzgerald
      intended to convey such a meaning.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Castle Connor, Thursday morning.'
    </p>
    <p>
      This note was consigned to the care of Mr. M'Donough, who forthwith
      departed to execute his mission. The sound of his horse's hoofs, as he
      rode rapidly away, struck heavily at my heart; but I found some
      satisfaction in the reflection that M'Donough appeared as averse from
      extreme measures as I was myself, for I well knew, with respect to the
      final result of the affair, that as much depended upon the tone adopted by
      the SECOND, as upon the nature of the written communication.
    </p>
    <p>
      I have seldom passed a more anxious hour than that which intervened
      between the departure and the return of that gentleman. Every instant I
      imagined I heard the tramp of a horse approaching, and every time that a
      door opened I fancied it was to give entrance to the eagerly expected
      courier. At length I did hear the hollow and rapid tread of a horse's hoof
      upon the avenue. It approached&mdash;it stopped&mdash;a hurried step
      traversed the hall&mdash;the room door opened, and M'Donough entered.
    </p>
    <p>
      'You have made great haste,' said O'Connor; 'did you find him at home?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I did,' replied M'Donough, 'and made the greater haste as Fitzgerald did
      not let me know the contents of his reply.'
    </p>
    <p>
      At the same time he handed a note to O'Connor, who instantly broke the
      seal. The words were as follow:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Mr. Fitzgerald regrets that anything which has fallen from him should
      have appeared to Mr. O'Connor to be intended to convey a reflection upon
      his honour (none such having been meant), and begs leave to disavow any
      wish to quarrel unnecessarily with Mr. O'Connor.
    </p>
    <p>
      'T&mdash;&mdash; Inn, Thursday morning.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I cannot describe how much I felt relieved on reading the above
      communication. I took O'Connor's hand and pressed it warmly, but my
      emotions were deeper and stronger than I cared to show, for I was
      convinced that he had escaped a most imminent danger. Nobody whose notions
      upon the subject are derived from the duelling of modern times, in which
      matters are conducted without any very sanguinary determination upon
      either side, and with equal want of skill and coolness by both parties,
      can form a just estimate of the danger incurred by one who ventured to
      encounter a duellist of the old school. Perfect coolness in the field, and
      a steadiness and accuracy (which to the unpractised appeared almost
      miraculous) in the use of the pistol, formed the characteristics of this
      class; and in addition to this there generally existed a kind of
      professional pride, which prompted the duellist, in default of any more
      malignant feeling, from motives of mere vanity, to seek the life of his
      antagonist. Fitzgerald's career had been a remarkably successful one, and
      I knew that out of thirteen duels which he had fought in Ireland, in nine
      cases he had KILLED his man. In those days one never heard of the parties
      leaving the field, as not unfrequently now occurs, without blood having
      been spilt; and the odds were, of course, in all cases tremendously
      against a young and unpractised man, when matched with an experienced
      antagonist. My impression respecting the magnitude of the danger which my
      friend had incurred was therefore by no means unwarranted.
    </p>
    <p>
      I now questioned O'Connor more accurately respecting the circumstances of
      his quarrel with Fitzgerald. It arose from some dispute respecting the
      application of a rule of piquet, at which game they had been playing, each
      interpreting it favourably to himself, and O'Connor, having lost
      considerably, was in no mood to conduct an argument with temper&mdash;an
      altercation ensued, and that of rather a pungent nature, and the result
      was that he left Fitzgerald's room rather abruptly, determined to demand
      an explanation in the most peremptory tone. For this purpose he had sent
      for M'Donough, and had commissioned him to deliver the note, which my
      arrival had fortunately intercepted.
    </p>
    <p>
      As it was now past noon, O'Connor made me promise to remain with him to
      dinner; and we sat down a party of three, all in high spirits at the
      termination of our anxieties. It is necessary to mention, for the purpose
      of accounting for what follows, that Mrs. O'Connor, or, as she was more
      euphoniously styled, the lady of Castle Connor, was precluded by
      ill-health from taking her place at the dinner-table, and, indeed, seldom
      left her room before four o'clock.(4) We were sitting after dinner sipping
      our claret, and talking, and laughing, and enjoying ourselves exceedingly,
      when a servant, stepping into the room, informed his master that a
      gentleman wanted to speak with him.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     (4) It is scarcely necessary to remind the reader, that at
     the period spoken of, the important hour of dinner occurred
     very nearly at noon.
</pre>
    <p>
      'Request him, with my compliments, to walk in,' said O'Connor; and in a
      few moments a gentleman entered the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      His appearance was anything but prepossessing. He was a little above the
      middle size, spare, and raw-boned; his face very red, his features sharp
      and bluish, and his age might be about sixty. His attire savoured a good
      deal of the SHABBY-GENTEEL; his clothes, which had much of tarnished and
      faded pretension about them, did not fit him, and had not improbably
      fluttered in the stalls of Plunket Street. We had risen on his entrance,
      and O'Connor had twice requested of him to take a chair at the table,
      without his hearing, or at least noticing, the invitation; while with a
      slow pace, and with an air of mingled importance and effrontery, he
      advanced into the centre of the apartment, and regarding our small party
      with a supercilious air, he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'I take the liberty of introducing myself&mdash;I am Captain M'Creagh,
      formerly of the&mdash;infantry. My business here is with a Mr. O'Connor,
      and the sooner it is despatched the better.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I am the gentleman you name,' said O'Connor; 'and as you appear
      impatient, we had better proceed to your commission without delay.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Then, Mr. O'Connor, you will please to read that note,' said the captain,
      placing a sealed paper in his hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      O'Connor read it through, and then observed:
    </p>
    <p>
      'This is very extraordinary indeed. This note appears to me perfectly
      unaccountable.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'You are very young, Mr. O'Connor,' said the captain, with vulgar
      familiarity; 'but, without much experience in these matters, I think you
      might have anticipated something like this. You know the old saying,
      "Second thoughts are best;" and so they are like to prove, by G&mdash;!'
    </p>
    <p>
      'You will have no objection, Captain M'Creagh, on the part of your friend,
      to my reading this note to these gentlemen; they are both confidential
      friends of mine, and one of them has already acted for me in this
      business.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I can have no objection,' replied the captain, 'to your doing what you
      please with your own. I have nothing more to do with that note once I put
      it safe into your hand; and when that is once done, it is all one to me,
      if you read it to half the world&mdash;that's YOUR concern, and no affair
      of mine.'
    </p>
    <p>
      O'Connor then read the following:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Mr. Fitzgerald begs leave to state, that upon re-perusing Mr. O'Connor's
      communication of this morning carefully, with an experienced friend, he is
      forced to consider himself as challenged. His friend, Captain M'Creagh,
      has been empowered by him to make all the necessary arrangements.
    </p>
    <p>
      'T&mdash;&mdash; Inn, Thursday.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I can hardly describe the astonishment with which I heard this note. I
      turned to the captain, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Surely, sir, there is some mistake in all this?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Not the slightest, I'll assure you, sir.' said he, coolly; 'the case is a
      very clear one, and I think my friend has pretty well made up his mind
      upon it. May I request your answer?' he continued, turning to O'Connor;
      'time is precious, you know.'
    </p>
    <p>
      O'Connor expressed his willingness to comply with the suggestion, and in a
      few minutes had folded and directed the following rejoinder:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Mr. O'Connor having received a satisfactory explanation from Mr.
      Fitzgerald, of the language used by that gentleman, feels that there no
      longer exists any grounds for misunderstanding, and wishes further to
      state, that the note of which Mr. Fitzgerald speaks was not intended as a
      challenge.'
    </p>
    <p>
      With this note the captain departed; and as we did not doubt that the
      message which he had delivered had been suggested by some unintentional
      misconstruction of O'Connor's first billet, we felt assured that the
      conclusion of his last note would set the matter at rest. In this belief,
      however, we were mistaken; before we had left the table, and in an
      incredibly short time, the captain returned. He entered the room with a
      countenance evidently tasked to avoid expressing the satisfaction which a
      consciousness of the nature of his mission had conferred; but in spite of
      all his efforts to look gravely unconcerned, there was a twinkle in the
      small grey eye, and an almost imperceptible motion in the corner of the
      mouth, which sufficiently betrayed his internal glee, as he placed a note
      in the hand of O'Connor. As the young man cast his eye over it, he
      coloured deeply, and turning to M'Donough, he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'You will have the goodness to make all the necessary arrangements for a
      meeting. Something has occurred to render one between me and Mr.
      Fitzgerald inevitable. Understand me literally, when I say that it is now
      totally impossible that this affair should be amicably arranged. You will
      have the goodness, M'Donough, to let me know as soon as all the
      particulars are arranged. Purcell,' he continued, 'will you have the
      kindness to accompany me?' and having bowed to M'Creagh, we left the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      As I closed the door after me, I heard the captain laugh, and thought I
      could distinguish the words&mdash;'By &mdash;&mdash; I knew Fitzgerald
      would bring him to his way of thinking before he stopped.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I followed O'Connor into his study, and on entering, the door being
      closed, he showed me the communication which had determined him upon
      hostilities. Its language was grossly impertinent, and it concluded by
      actually threatening to 'POST' him, in case he further attempted 'to be
      OFF.' I cannot describe the agony of indignation in which O'Connor writhed
      under this insult. He said repeatedly that 'he was a degraded and
      dishohoured man,' that 'he was dragged into the field,' that 'there was
      ignominy in the very thought that such a letter should have been directed
      to him.' It was in vain that I reasoned against this impression; the
      conviction that he had been disgraced had taken possession of his mind. He
      said again and again that nothing but his DEATH could remove the stain
      which his indecision had cast upon the name of his family. I hurried to
      the hall, on hearing M'Donough and the captain passing, and reached the
      door just in time to hear the latter say, as he mounted his horse:
    </p>
    <p>
      'All the rest can be arranged on the spot; and so farewell, Mr. M'Donough&mdash;we'll
      meet at Philippi, you know;' and with this classical allusion, which was
      accompanied with a grin and a bow, and probably served many such
      occasions, the captain took his departure.
    </p>
    <p>
      M'Donough briefly stated the few particulars which had been arranged. The
      parties were to meet at the stand-house, in the race-ground, which lay at
      about an equal distance between Castle Connor and the town of T&mdash;&mdash;.
      The hour appointed was half-past five on the next morning, at which time
      the twilight would be sufficiently advanced to afford a distinct view; and
      the weapons to be employed were PISTOLS&mdash;M'Creagh having claimed, on
      the part of his friend, all the advantages of the CHALLENGED party, and
      having, consequently, insisted upon the choice of 'TOOLS,' as he expressed
      himself; and it was further stipulated that the utmost secrecy should be
      observed, as Fitzgerald would incur great risk from the violence of the
      peasantry, in case the affair took wind. These conditions were, of course,
      agreed upon by O'Connor, and M'Donough left the castle, having appointed
      four o'clock upon the next morning as the hour of his return, by which
      time it would be his business to provide everything necessary for the
      meeting. On his departure, O'Connor requested me to remain with him upon
      that evening, saying that 'he could not bear to be alone with his mother.'
      It was to me a most painful request, but at the same time one which I
      could not think of refusing. I felt, however, that the difficulty at least
      of the task which I had to perform would be in some measure mitigated by
      the arrival of two relations of O'Connor upon that evening.
    </p>
    <p>
      'It is very fortunate,' said O'Connor, whose thoughts had been running
      upon the same subject, 'that the O'Gradys will be with us to-night; their
      gaiety and good-humour will relieve us from a heavy task. I trust that
      nothing may occur to prevent their coming.' Fervently concurring in the
      same wish, I accompanied O'Connor into the parlour, there to await the
      arrival of his mother.
    </p>
    <p>
      God grant that I may never spend such another evening! The O'Gradys DID
      come, but their high and noisy spirits, so far from relieving me, did but
      give additional gloom to the despondency, I might say the despair, which
      filled my heart with misery&mdash;the terrible forebodings which I could
      not for an instant silence, turned their laughter into discord, and seemed
      to mock the smiles and jests of the unconscious party. When I turned my
      eyes upon the mother, I thought I never had seen her look so proudly and
      so lovingly upon her son before&mdash;it cut me to the heart&mdash;oh, how
      cruelly I was deceiving her! I was a hundred times on the very point of
      starting up, and, at all hazards, declaring to her how matters were; but
      other feelings subdued my better emotions. Oh, what monsters are we made
      of by the fashions of the world! how are our kindlier and nobler feelings
      warped or destroyed by their baleful influences! I felt that it would not
      be HONOURABLE, that it would not be ETIQUETTE, to betray O'Connor's
      secret. I sacrificed a higher and a nobler duty than I have since been
      called upon to perform, to the dastardly fear of bearing the unmerited
      censure of a world from which I was about to retire. O Fashion! thou gaudy
      idol, whose feet are red with the blood of human sacrifice, would I had
      always felt towards thee as I now do!
    </p>
    <p>
      O'Connor was not dejected; on the contrary, he joined with loud and lively
      alacrity in the hilarity of the little party; but I could see in the flush
      of his cheek, and in the unusual brightness of his eye, all the excitement
      of fever&mdash;he was making an effort almost beyond his strength, but he
      succeeded&mdash;and when his mother rose to leave the room, it was with
      the impression that her son was the gayest and most light-hearted of the
      company. Twice or thrice she had risen with the intention of retiring, but
      O'Connor, with an eagerness which I alone could understand, had persuaded
      her to remain until the usual hour of her departure had long passed; and
      when at length she arose, declaring that she could not possibly stay
      longer, I alone could comprehend the desolate change which passed over his
      manner; and when I saw them part, it was with the sickening conviction
      that those two beings, so dear to one another, so loved, so cherished,
      should meet no more.
    </p>
    <p>
      O'Connor briefly informed his cousins of the position in which he was
      placed, requesting them at the same time to accompany him to the field,
      and this having been settled, we separated, each to his own apartment. I
      had wished to sit up with O'Connor, who had matters to arrange sufficient
      to employ him until the hour appointed for M'Donough's visit; but he would
      not hear of it, and I was forced, though sorely against my will, to leave
      him without a companion. I went to my room, and, in a state of excitement
      which I cannot describe, I paced for hours up and down its narrow
      precincts. I could not&mdash;who could?&mdash;analyse the strange,
      contradictory, torturing feelings which, while I recoiled in shrinking
      horror from the scene which the morning was to bring, yet forced me to
      wish the intervening time annihilated; each hour that the clock told
      seemed to vibrate and tinkle through every nerve; my agitation was
      dreadful; fancy conjured up the forms of those who filled my thoughts with
      more than the vividness of reality; things seemed to glide through the
      dusky shadows of the room. I saw the dreaded form of Fitzgerald&mdash;I
      heard the hated laugh of the captain&mdash;and again the features of
      O'Connor would appear before me, with ghastly distinctness, pale and
      writhed in death, the gouts of gore clotted in the mouth, and the
      eye-balls glared and staring. Scared with the visions which seemed to
      throng with unceasing rapidity and vividness, I threw open the window and
      looked out upon the quiet scene around. I turned my eyes in the direction
      of the town; a heavy cloud was lowering darkly about it, and I, in impious
      frenzy, prayed to God that it might burst in avenging fires upon the
      murderous wretch who lay beneath. At length, sick and giddy with excess of
      excitement, I threw myself upon the bed without removing my clothes, and
      endeavoured to compose myself so far as to remain quiet until the hour for
      our assembling should arrive.
    </p>
    <p>
      A few minutes before four o'clock I stole noiselessly downstairs, and made
      my way to the small study already mentioned. A candle was burning within;
      and, when I opened the door, O'Connor was reading a book, which, on seeing
      me, he hastily closed, colouring slightly as he did so. We exchanged a
      cordial but mournful greeting; and after a slight pause he said, laying
      his hand upon the volume which he had shut a moment before:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Purcell, I feel perfectly calm, though I cannot say that I have much hope
      as to the issue of this morning's rencounter. I shall avoid half the
      danger. If I must fall, I am determined I shall not go down to the grave
      with his blood upon my hands. I have resolved not to fire at Fitzgerald&mdash;that
      is, to fire in such a direction as to assure myself against hitting him.
      Do not say a word of this to the O'Gradys. Your doing so would only
      produce fruitless altercation; they could not understand my motives. I
      feel convinced that I shall not leave the field alive. If I must die
      to-day, I shall avoid an awful aggravation of wretchedness. Purcell,' he
      continued, after a little space, 'I was so weak as to feel almost ashamed
      of the manner in which I was occupied as you entered the room. Yes, <i>I&mdash;I</i>
      who will be, before this evening, a cold and lifeless clod, was ashamed to
      have spent my last moment of reflection in prayer. God pardon me! God
      pardon me!' he repeated.
    </p>
    <p>
      I took his hand and pressed it, but I could not speak. I sought for words
      of comfort, but they would not come. To have uttered one cheering sentence
      I must have contradicted every impression of my own mind. I felt too much
      awed to attempt it. Shortly afterwards, M'Donough arrived. No wretched
      patient ever underwent a more thrilling revulsion at the first sight of
      the case of surgical instruments under which he had to suffer, than did I
      upon beholding a certain oblong flat mahogany box, bound with brass, and
      of about two feet in length, laid upon the table in the hall. O'Connor,
      thanking him for his punctuality, requested him to come into his study for
      a moment, when, with a melancholy collectedness, he proceeded to make
      arrangements for our witnessing his will. The document was a brief one,
      and the whole matter was just arranged, when the two O'Gradys crept softly
      into the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      'So! last will and testament,' said the elder. 'Why, you have a very BLUE
      notion of these matters. I tell you, you need not be uneasy. I remember
      very well, when young Ryan of Ballykealey met M'Neil the duellist, bets
      ran twenty to one against him. I stole away from school, and had a peep at
      the fun as well as the best of them. They fired together. Ryan received
      the ball through the collar of his coat, and M'Neil in the temple; he spun
      like a top: it was a most unexpected thing, and disappointed his friends
      damnably. It was admitted, however, to have been very pretty shooting upon
      both sides. To be sure,' he continued, pointing to the will, 'you are in
      the right to keep upon the safe side of fortune; but then, there is no
      occasion to be altogether so devilish down in the mouth as you appear to
      be.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'You will allow,' said O'Connor, 'that the chances are heavily against
      me.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Why, let me see,' he replied, 'not so hollow a thin, either. Let me see,
      we'll say about four to one against you; you may chance to throw doublets
      like him I told you of, and then what becomes of the odds I'd like to
      know? But let things go as they will, I'll give and take four to one, in
      pounds and tens of pounds. There, M'Donough, there's a GET for you; b&mdash;t
      me, if it is not. Poh! the fellow is stolen away,' he continued, observing
      that the object of his proposal had left the room; 'but d&mdash;&mdash;
      it, Purcell, you are fond of a SOFT THING, too, in a quiet way&mdash;I'm
      sure you are&mdash;so curse me if I do not make you the same offer-is it a
      go?'
    </p>
    <p>
      I was too much disgusted to make any reply, but I believe my looks
      expressed my feelings sufficiently, for in a moment he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, I see there is nothing to be done, so we may as well be stirring.
      M'Donough, myself, and my brother will saddle the horses in a jiffy, while
      you and Purcell settle anything which remains to be arranged.'
    </p>
    <p>
      So saying, he left the room with as much alacrity as if it were to prepare
      for a foxhunt. Selfish, heartless fool! I have often since heard him
      spoken of as A CURSED GOOD-NATURED DOG and a D&mdash;&mdash; GOOD FELLOW;
      but such eulogies as these are not calculated to mitigate the abhorrence
      with which his conduct upon that morning inspired me.
    </p>
    <p>
      The chill mists of night were still hovering on the landscape as our party
      left the castle. It was a raw, comfortless morning&mdash;a kind of
      drizzling fog hung heavily over the scene, dimming the light of the sun,
      which had now risen, into a pale and even a grey glimmer. As the appointed
      hour was fast approaching, it was proposed that we should enter the
      race-ground at a point close to the stand-house&mdash;a measure which
      would save us a ride of nearly two miles, over a broken road; at which
      distance there was an open entrance into the race-ground. Here,
      accordingly, we dismounted, and leaving our horses in the care of a
      country fellow who happened to be stirring at that early hour, we
      proceeded up a narrow lane, over a side wall of which we were to climb
      into the open ground where stood the now deserted building, under which
      the meeting was to take place. Our progress was intercepted by the
      unexpected appearance of an old woman, who, in the scarlet cloak which is
      the picturesque characteristic of the female peasantry of the south, was
      moving slowly down the avenue to meet us, uttering that peculiarly wild
      and piteous lamentation well known by the name of 'the Irish cry,'
      accompanied throughout by all the customary gesticulation of passionate
      grief. This rencounter was more awkward than we had at first anticipated;
      for, upon a nearer approach, the person proved to be no other than an old
      attached dependent of the family, and who had herself nursed O'Connor. She
      quickened her pace as we advanced almost to a run; and, throwing her arms
      round O'Connor's neck, she poured forth such a torrent of lamentation,
      reproach, and endearment, as showed that she was aware of the nature of
      our purpose, whence and by what means I knew not. It was in vain that he
      sought to satisfy her by evasion, and gently to extricate himself from her
      embrace. She knelt upon the ground, and clasped her arms round his legs,
      uttering all the while such touching supplications, such cutting and
      passionate expressions of woe, as went to my very heart.
    </p>
    <p>
      At length, with much difficulty, we passed this most painful interruption;
      and, crossing the boundary wall, were placed beyond her reach. The
      O'Gradys damned her for a troublesome hag, and passed on with O'Connor,
      but I remained behind for a moment. The poor woman looked hopelessly at
      the high wall which separated her from him she had loved from infancy, and
      to be with whom at that minute she would have given worlds, she took her
      seat upon a solitary stone under the opposite wall, and there, in a low,
      subdued key, she continued to utter her sorrow in words so desolate, yet
      expressing such a tenderness of devotion as wrung my heart.
    </p>
    <p>
      'My poor woman,' I said, laying my hand gently upon her shoulder, 'you
      will make yourself ill; the morning is very cold, and your cloak is but a
      thin defence against the damp and chill. Pray return home and take this;
      it may be useful to you.'
    </p>
    <p>
      So saying, I dropped a purse, with what money I had about me, into her
      lap, but it lay there unheeded; she did not hear me.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh I my child, my child, my darlin',' she sobbed, 'are you gone from me?
      are you gone from me? Ah, mavourneen, mavourneen, you'll never come back
      alive to me again. The crathur that slept on my bosom&mdash;the lovin'
      crathur that I was so proud of&mdash;they'll kill him, they'll kill him.
      Oh, voh! voh!'
    </p>
    <p>
      The affecting tone, the feeling, the abandonment with which all this was
      uttered, none can conceive who have not heard the lamentations of the
      Irish peasantry. It brought tears to my eyes. I saw that no consolation of
      mine could soothe her grief, so I turned and departed; but as I rapidly
      traversed the level sward which separated me from my companions, now
      considerably in advance, I could still hear the wailings of the solitary
      mourner.
    </p>
    <p>
      As we approached the stand-house, it was evident that our antagonists had
      already arrived. Our path lay by the side of a high fence constructed of
      loose stones, and on turning a sharp angle at its extremity, we found
      ourselves close to the appointed spot, and within a few yards of a crowd
      of persons, some mounted and some on foot, evidently awaiting our arrival.
      The affair had unaccountably taken wind, as the number of the expectants
      clearly showed; but for this there was now no remedy.
    </p>
    <p>
      As our little party advanced we were met and saluted by several
      acquaintances, whom curiosity, if no deeper feeling, had brought to the
      place. Fitzgerald and the Captain had arrived, and having dismounted, were
      standing upon the sod. The former, as we approached, bowed slightly and
      sullenly&mdash;while the latter, evidently in high good humour, made his
      most courteous obeisance. No time was to be lost; and the two seconds
      immediately withdrew to a slight distance, for the purpose of completing
      the last minute arrangements. It was a brief but horrible interval&mdash;each
      returned to his principal to communicate the result, which was soon caught
      up and repeated from mouth to mouth throughout the crowd. I felt a strange
      and insurmountable reluctance to hear the sickening particulars detailed;
      and as I stood irresolute at some distance from the principal parties, a
      top-booted squireen, with a hunting whip in his hand, bustling up to a
      companion of his, exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Not fire together!&mdash;did you ever hear the like? If Fitzgerald gets
      the first shot all is over. M'Donough sold the pass, by&mdash;&mdash;, and
      that is the long and the short of it.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The parties now moved down a little to a small level space, suited to the
      purpose; and the captain, addressing M'Donough, said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Mr. M'Donough, you'll now have the goodness to toss for choice of ground;
      as the light comes from the east the line must of course run north and
      south. Will you be so obliging as to toss up a crown-piece, while I call?'
    </p>
    <p>
      A coin was instantly chucked into the air. The captain cried, 'Harp.' The
      HEAD was uppermost, and M'Donough immediately made choice of the southern
      point at which to place his friend&mdash;a position which it will be
      easily seen had the advantage of turning his back upon the light&mdash;no
      trifling superiority of location. The captain turned with a kind of laugh,
      and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'By &mdash;&mdash;, sir, you are as cunning as a dead pig; but you forgot
      one thing. My friend is a left-handed gunner, though never a bit the worse
      for that; so you see there is no odds as far as the choice of light goes.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He then proceeded to measure nine paces in a direction running north and
      south, and the principals took their ground.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I must be troublesome to you once again, Mr. M'Donough. One toss more,
      and everything is complete. We must settle who is to have the FIRST SLAP.'
    </p>
    <p>
      A piece of money was again thrown into the air; again the captain lost the
      toss and M'Donough proceeded to load the pistols. I happened to stand near
      Fitzgerald, and I overheard the captain, with a chuckle, say something to
      him in which the word 'cravat' was repeated. It instantly occurred to me
      that the captain's attention was directed to a bright-coloured muffler
      which O'Connor wore round his neck, and which would afford his antagonist
      a distinct and favourable mark. I instantly urged him to remove it, and at
      length, with difficulty, succeeded. He seemed perfectly careless as to any
      precaution. Everything was now ready; the pistol was placed in O'Connor's
      hand, and he only awaited the word from the captain.
    </p>
    <p>
      M'Creagh then said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Mr. M'Donough, is your principal ready?'
    </p>
    <p>
      M'Donough replied in the affirmative; and, after a slight pause, the
      captain, as had been arranged, uttered the words:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Ready&mdash;fire.'
    </p>
    <p>
      O'Connor fired, but so wide of the mark that some one in the crowd
      exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Fired in the air.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Who says he fired in the air?' thundered Fitzgerald. 'By &mdash;&mdash;
      he lies, whoever he is.' There was a silence. 'But even if he was fool
      enough to fire in the air, it is not in HIS power to put an end to the
      quarrel by THAT. D&mdash;&mdash; my soul, if I am come here to be played
      with like a child, and by the Almighty &mdash;&mdash; you shall hear more
      of this, each and everyone of you, before I'm satisfied.'
    </p>
    <p>
      A kind of low murmur, or rather groan, was now raised, and a slight motion
      was observable in the crowd, as if to intercept Fitzgerald's passage to
      his horse. M'Creagh, drawing the horse close to the spot where Fitzgerald
      stood, threatened, with the most awful imprecations, 'to blow the brains
      out of the first man who should dare to press on them.'
    </p>
    <p>
      O'Connor now interfered, requesting the crowd to forbear, and some degree
      of order was restored. He then said, 'that in firing as he did, he had no
      intention whatever of waiving his right of firing upon Fitzgerald, and of
      depriving that gentleman of his right of prosecuting the affair to the
      utmost&mdash;that if any person present imagined that he intended to fire
      in the air, he begged to set him right; since, so far from seeking to
      exort an unwilling reconciliation, he was determined that no power on
      earth should induce him to concede one inch of ground to Mr. Fitzgerald.'
    </p>
    <p>
      This announcement was received with a shout by the crowd, who now resumed
      their places at either side of the plot of ground which had been measured.
      The principals took their places once more, and M'Creagh proceeded, with
      the nicest and most anxious care, to load the pistols; and this task being
      accomplished, Fitzgerald whispered something in the Captain's ear, who
      instantly drew his friend's horse so as to place him within a step of his
      rider, and then tightened the girths. This accomplished, Fitzgerald
      proceeded deliberately to remove his coat, which he threw across his horse
      in front of the saddle; and then, with the assistance of M'Creagh, he
      rolled the shirt sleeve up to the shoulder, so as to leave the whole of
      his muscular arm perfectly naked. A cry of 'Coward, coward! butcher,
      butcher!' arose from the crowd. Fitzgerald paused.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Do you object, Mr. M'Donough? and upon what grounds, if you please?' said
      he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Certainly he does not,' replied O'Connor; and, turning to M'Donough, he
      added, 'pray let there be no unnecessary delay.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'There is no objection, then,' said Fitzgerald.
    </p>
    <p>
      '<i>I</i> object,' said the younger of the O'Gradys, 'if nobody else
      will.'
    </p>
    <p>
      ' And who the devil are you, that DARES to object?' shouted Fitzgerald;
      'and what d&mdash;d presumption prompts you to DARE to wag your tongue
      here?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I am Mr. O'Grady, of Castle Blake,' replied the young man, now much
      enraged; 'and by &mdash;&mdash;, you shall answer for your language to
      me.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Shall I, by &mdash;&mdash;? Shall I?' cried he, with a laugh of brutal
      scorn; 'the more the merrier, d&mdash;n the doubt of it&mdash;so now hold
      your tongue, for I promise you you shall have business enough of your own
      to think about, and that before long.'
    </p>
    <p>
      There was an appalling ferocity in his tone and manner which no words
      could convey. He seemed transformed; he was actually like a man possessed.
      Was it possible, I thought, that I beheld the courteous gentleman, the
      gay, good-humoured retailer of amusing anecdote with whom, scarce two days
      ago, I had laughed and chatted, in the blasphemous and murderous ruffian
      who glared and stormed before me!
    </p>
    <p>
      O'Connor interposed, and requested that time should not be unnecessarily
      lost.
    </p>
    <p>
      'You have not got a second coat on?' inquired the Captain. 'I beg pardon,
      but my duty to my friend requires that I should ascertain the point.'
    </p>
    <p>
      O'Connor replied in the negative. The Captain expressed himself as
      satisfied, adding, in what he meant to be a complimentary strain, 'that he
      knew Mr. O'Connor would scorn to employ padding or any unfair mode of
      protection.'
    </p>
    <p>
      There was now a breathless silence. O'Connor stood perfectly motionless;
      and, excepting the death-like paleness of his features, he exhibited no
      sign of agitation. His eye was steady&mdash;his lip did not tremble&mdash;his
      attitude was calm. The Captain, having re-examined the priming of the
      pistols, placed one of them in the hand of Fitzgerald.&mdash;M'Donough
      inquired whether the parties were prepared, and having been answered in
      the affirmative, he proceeded to give the word, 'Ready.' Fitzgerald raised
      his hand, but almost instantly lowered it again. The crowd had pressed too
      much forward as it appeared, and his eye had been unsteadied by the
      flapping of the skirt of a frieze riding-coat worn by one of the
      spectators.
    </p>
    <p>
      'In the name of my principal,' said the Captain, 'I must and do insist
      upon these gentlemen moving back a little. We ask but little; fair play,
      and no favour.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The crowd moved as requested. M'Donough repeated his former question, and
      was answered as before. There was a breathless silence. Fitzgerald fixed
      his eye upon O'Connor. The appointed signal, 'Ready, fire!' was given.
      There was a pause while one might slowly reckon three&mdash;Fitzgerald
      fired&mdash;and O'Connor fell helplessly upon the ground.
    </p>
    <p>
      'There is no time to be lost,' said M'Creagrh; 'for, by &mdash;&mdash;,
      you have done for him.'
    </p>
    <p>
      So saying, he threw himself upon his horse, and was instantly followed at
      a hard gallop by Fitzgerald.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Cold-blooded murder, if ever murder was committed,' said O'Grady. 'He
      shall hang for it; d&mdash;n me, but he shall.'
    </p>
    <p>
      A hopeless attempt was made to overtake the fugitives; but they were
      better mounted than any of their pursuers, and escaped with ease. Curses
      and actual yells of execration followed their course; and as, in crossing
      the brow of a neighbouring hill, they turned round in the saddle to
      observe if they were pursued, every gesture which could express fury and
      defiance was exhausted by the enraged and defeated multitude.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Clear the way, boys,' said young O'Grady, who with me was kneeling beside
      O'Connor, while we supported him in our arms; 'do not press so close, and
      be d&mdash;d; can't you let the fresh air to him; don't you see he's
      dying?'
    </p>
    <p>
      On opening his waistcoat we easily detected the wound: it was a little
      below the chest&mdash;a small blue mark, from which oozed a single heavy
      drop of blood.
    </p>
    <p>
      'He is bleeding but little&mdash;that is a comfort at all events,' said
      one of the gentlemen who surrounded the wounded man.
    </p>
    <p>
      Another suggested the expediency of his being removed homeward with as
      little delay as possible, and recommended, for this purpose, that a door
      should be removed from its hinges, and the patient, laid upon this, should
      be conveyed from the field. Upon this rude bier my poor friend was carried
      from that fatal ground towards Castle Connor. I walked close by his side,
      and observed every motion of his. He seldom opened his eyes, and was
      perfectly still, excepting a nervous WORKING of the fingers, and a slight,
      almost imperceptible twitching of the features, which took place, however,
      only at intervals. The first word he uttered was spoken as we approached
      the entrance of the castle itself, when he said; repeatedly, 'The back
      way, the back way.' He feared lest his mother should meet him abruptly and
      without preparation; but although this fear was groundless, since she
      never left her room until late in the day, yet it was thought advisable,
      and, indeed, necessary, to caution all the servants most strongly against
      breathing a hint to their mistress of the events which had befallen.
    </p>
    <p>
      Two or three gentlemen had ridden from the field one after another,
      promising that they should overtake our party before it reached the
      castle, bringing with them medical aid from one quarter or another; and we
      determined that Mrs. O'Connor should not know anything of the occurrence
      until the opinion of some professional man should have determined the
      extent of the injury which her son had sustained&mdash;a course of conduct
      which would at least have the effect of relieving her from the horrors of
      suspense. When O'Connor found himself in his own room, and laid upon his
      own bed, he appeared much revived&mdash;so much so, that I could not help
      admitting a strong hope that all might yet be well.
    </p>
    <p>
      'After all, Purcell,' said he, with a melancholy smile, and speaking with
      evident difficulty, 'I believe I have got off with a trifling wound. I am
      sure it cannot be fatal I feel so little pain&mdash;almost none.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I cautioned him against fatiguing himself by endeavouring to speak; and he
      remained quiet for a little time. At length he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Purcell, I trust this lesson shall not have been given in vain. God has
      been very merciful to me; I feel&mdash;I have an internal confidence that
      I am not wounded mortally. Had I been fatally wounded&mdash;had I been
      killed upon the spot, only think on it'&mdash;and he closed his eyes as if
      the very thought made him dizzy&mdash;'struck down into the grave,
      unprepared as I am, in the very blossom of my sins, without a moment of
      repentance or of reflection; I must have been lost&mdash;lost for ever and
      ever.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I prevailed upon him, with some difficulty, to abstain from such agitating
      reflections, and at length induced him to court such repose as his
      condition admitted of, by remaining perfectly silent, and as much as
      possible without motion.
    </p>
    <p>
      O'Connor and I only were in the room; he had lain for some time in
      tolerable quiet, when I thought I distinguished the bustle attendant upon
      the arrival of some one at the castle, and went eagerly to the window,
      believing, or at least hoping, that the sounds might announce the approach
      of the medical man, whom we all longed most impatiently to see.
    </p>
    <p>
      My conjecture was right; I had the satisfaction of seeing him dismount and
      prepare to enter the castle, when my observations were interrupted, and my
      attention was attracted by a smothered, gurgling sound proceeding from the
      bed in which lay the wounded man. I instantly turned round, and in doing
      so the spectacle which met my eyes was sufficiently shocking.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had left O'Connor lying in the bed, supported by pillows, perfectly
      calm, and with his eyes closed: he was now lying nearly in the same
      position, his eyes open and almost starting from their sockets, with every
      feature pale and distorted as death, and vomiting blood in quantities that
      were frightful. I rushed to the door and called for assistance; the
      paroxysm, though violent, was brief, and O'Connor sank into a swoon so
      deep and death-like, that I feared he should waken no more.
    </p>
    <p>
      The surgeon, a little, fussy man, but I believe with some skill to justify
      his pretensions, now entered the room, carrying his case of instruments,
      and followed by servants bearing basins and water and bandages of linen.
      He relieved our doubts by instantly assuring us that 'the patient' was
      still living; and at the same time professed his determination to take
      advantage of the muscular relaxation which the faint had induced to
      examine the wound&mdash;adding that a patient was more easily 'handled'
      when in a swoon than under other circumstances.
    </p>
    <p>
      After examining the wound in front where the ball had entered, he passed
      his hand round beneath the shoulder, and after a little pause he shook his
      head, observing that he feared very much that one of the vertebrae was
      fatally injured, but that he could not say decidedly until his patient
      should revive a little. 'Though his language was very technical, and
      consequently to me nearly unintelligible, I could perceive plainly by his
      manner that he considered the case as almost hopeless.
    </p>
    <p>
      O'Connor gradually gave some signs of returning animation, and at length
      was so far restored as to be enabled to speak. After some few general
      questions as to how he felt affected, etc., etc., the surgeon, placing his
      hand upon his leg and pressing it slightly, asked him if he felt any
      pressure upon the limb? O'Connor answered in the negative&mdash;he pressed
      harder, and repeated the question; still the answer was the same, till at
      length, by repeated experiments, he ascertained that all that part of the
      body which lay behind the wound was paralysed, proving that the spine must
      have received some fatal injury.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, doctor,' said O'Connor, after the examination of the wound was
      over; 'well, I shall do, shan't I?'
    </p>
    <p>
      The physician was silent for a moment, and then, as if with an effort, he
      replied:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Indeed, my dear sir, it would not be honest to flatter you with much
      hope.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Eh?' said O'Connor with more alacrity than I had seen him exhibit since
      the morning; 'surely I did not hear you aright; I spoke of my recovery&mdash;surely
      there is no doubt; there can be none&mdash;speak frankly, doctor, for
      God's sake&mdash;am I dying?'
    </p>
    <p>
      The surgeon was evidently no stoic, and his manner had extinguished in me
      every hope, even before he had uttered a word in reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      'You are&mdash;you are indeed dying. There is no hope; I should but
      deceive you if I held out any.'
    </p>
    <p>
      As the surgeon uttered these terrible words, the hands which O'Connor had
      stretched towards him while awaiting his reply fell powerless by his side;
      his head sank forward; it seemed as if horror and despair had unstrung
      every nerve and sinew; he appeared to collapse and shrink together as a
      plant might under the influence of a withering spell.
    </p>
    <p>
      It has often been my fate, since then, to visit the chambers of death and
      of suffering; I have witnessed fearful agonies of body and of soul; the
      mysterious shudderings of the departing spirit, and the heart-rending
      desolation of the survivors; the severing of the tenderest ties, the
      piteous yearnings of unavailing love&mdash;of all these things the sad
      duties of my profession have made me a witness. But, generally speaking, I
      have observed in such scenes some thing to mitigate, if not the sorrows,
      at least the terrors, of death; the dying man seldom seems to feel the
      reality of his situation; a dull consciousness of approaching dissolution,
      a dim anticipation of unconsciousness and insensibility, are the feelings
      which most nearly border upon an appreciation of his state; the film of
      death seems to have overspread the mind's eye, objects lose their
      distinctness, and float cloudily before it, and the apathy and apparent
      indifference with which men recognise the sure advances of immediate
      death, rob that awful hour of much of its terrors, and the death-bed of
      its otherwise inevitable agonies.
    </p>
    <p>
      This is a merciful dispensation; but the rule has its exceptions&mdash;its
      terrible exceptions. When a man is brought in an instant, by some sudden
      accident, to the very verge of the fathomless pit of death, with all his
      recollections awake, and his perceptions keenly and vividly alive, without
      previous illness to subdue the tone of the mind as to dull its
      apprehensions&mdash;then, and then only, the death-bed is truly terrible.
    </p>
    <p>
      Oh, what a contrast did O'Connor afford as he lay in all the abject
      helplessness of undisguised terror upon his death-bed, to the proud
      composure with which he had taken the field that morning. I had always
      before thought of death as of a quiet sleep stealing gradually upon
      exhausted nature, made welcome by suffering, or, at least, softened by
      resignation; I had never before stood by the side of one upon whom the
      hand of death had been thus suddenly laid; I had never seen the tyrant
      arrayed in his terror till then. Never before or since have I seen horror
      so intensely depicted. It seemed actually as if O'Connor's mind had been
      unsettled by the shock; the few words he uttered were marked with all the
      incoherence of distraction; but it was not words that marked his despair
      most strongly, the appalling and heart-sickening groans that came from the
      terror-stricken and dying man must haunt me while I live; the expression,
      too, of hopeless, imploring agony with which he turned his eyes from
      object to object, I can never forget. At length, appearing suddenly to
      recollect himself, he said, with startling alertness, but in a voice so
      altered that I scarce could recognise the tones:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Purcell, Purcell, go and tell my poor mother; she must know all, and
      then, quick, quick, quick, call your uncle, bring him here; I must have a
      chance.' He made a violent but fruitless effort to rise, and after a
      slight pause continued, with deep and urgent solemnity: 'Doctor, how long
      shall I live? Don't flatter me. Compliments at a death-bed are out of
      place; doctor, for God's sake, as you would not have my soul perish with
      my body, do not mock a dying man; have I an hour to live?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Certainly,' replied the surgeon; 'if you will but endeavour to keep
      yourself tranquil; otherwise I cannot answer for a moment.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, doctor,' said the patient, 'I will obey you; now, Purcell, my first
      and dearest friend, will you inform my poor mother of&mdash;of what you
      see, and return with your uncle; I know you will.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I took the dear fellow's hand and kissed it, it was the only answer I
      could give, and left the room. I asked the first female servant I chanced
      to meet, if her mistress were yet up, and was answered in the affirmative.
      Without giving myself time to hesitate, I requested her to lead me to her
      lady's room, which she accordingly did; she entered first, I supposed to
      announce my name, and I followed closely; the poor mother said something,
      and held out her hands to welcome me; I strove for words; I could not
      speak, but nature found expression; I threw myself at her feet and covered
      her hands with kisses and tears. My manner was enough; with a quickness
      almost preternatural she understood it all; she simply said the words:
      'O'Connor is killed;' she uttered no more.
    </p>
    <p>
      How I left the room I know not; I rode madly to my uncle's residence, and
      brought him back with me&mdash;all the rest is a blank. I remember
      standing by O'Connor's bedside, and kissing the cold pallid forehead again
      and again; I remember the pale serenity of the beautiful features; I
      remember that I looked upon the dead face of my friend, and I remember no
      more.
    </p>
    <p>
      For many months I lay writhing and raving in the frenzy of brain fever; a
      hundred times I stood tottering at the brink of death, and long after my
      restoration to bodily health was assured, it appeared doubtful whether I
      should ever be restored to reason. But God dealt very mercifully with me;
      His mighty hand rescued me from death and from madness when one or other
      appeared inevitable. As soon as I was permitted pen and ink, I wrote to
      the bereaved mother in a tone bordering upon frenzy. I accused myself of
      having made her childless; I called myself a murderer; I believed myself
      accursed; I could not find terms strong enough to express my abhorrence of
      my own conduct. But, oh! what an answer I received, so mild, so sweet,
      from the desolate, childless mother! its words spoke all that is beautiful
      in Christianity&mdash;it was forgiveness&mdash;it was resignation. I am
      convinced that to that letter, operating as it did upon a mind already
      predisposed, is owing my final determination to devote myself to that
      profession in which, for more than half a century, I have been a humble
      minister.
    </p>
    <p>
      Years roll away, and we count them not as they pass, but their influence
      is not the less certain that it is silent; the deepest wounds are
      gradually healed, the keenest griefs are mitigated, and we, in character,
      feelings, tastes, and pursuits, become such altered beings, that but for
      some few indelible marks which past events must leave behind them, which
      time may soften, but can never efface; our very identity would be dubious.
      Who has not felt all this at one time or other? Who has not mournfully
      felt it? This trite, but natural train of reflection filled my mind as I
      approached the domain of Castle Connor some ten years after the occurrence
      of the events above narrated. Everything looked the same as when I had
      left it; the old trees stood as graceful and as grand as ever; no plough
      had violated the soft green sward; no utilitarian hand had constrained the
      wanderings of the clear and sportive stream, or disturbed the
      lichen-covered rocks through which it gushed, or the wild coppice that
      over-shadowed its sequestered nooks&mdash;but the eye that looked upon
      these things was altered, and memory was busy with other days, shrouding
      in sadness every beauty that met my sight.
    </p>
    <p>
      As I approached the castle my emotions became so acutely painful that I
      had almost returned the way I came, without accomplishing the purpose for
      which I had gone thus far; and nothing but the conviction that my having
      been in the neighbourhood of Castle Connor without visiting its desolate
      mistress would render me justly liable to the severest censure, could
      overcome my reluctance to encountering the heavy task which was before me.
      I recognised the old servant who opened the door, but he did not know me.
      I was completely changed; suffering of body and mind had altered me in
      feature and in bearing, as much as in character. I asked the man whether
      his mistress ever saw visitors. He answered:
    </p>
    <p>
      'But seldom; perhaps, however, if she knew that an old friend wished to
      see her for a few minutes, she would gratify him so far.'
    </p>
    <p>
      At the same time I placed my card in his hand, and requested him to
      deliver it to his mistress. He returned in a few moments, saying that his
      lady would be happy to see me in the parlour, and I accordingly followed
      him to the door, which he opened. I entered the room, and was in a moment
      at the side of my early friend and benefactress. I was too much agitated
      to speak; I could only hold the hands which she gave me, while, spite of
      every effort, the tears flowed fast and bitterly.
    </p>
    <p>
      'It was kind, very, very kind of you to come to see me,' she said, with
      far more composure than I could have commanded; 'I see it is very painful
      to you.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I endeavoured to compose myself, and for a little time we remained silent;
      she was the first to speak:
    </p>
    <p>
      'You will be surprised, Mr. Purcell, when you observe the calmness with
      which I can speak of him who was dearest to me, who is gone; but my
      thoughts are always with him, and the recollections of his love'&mdash;her
      voice faltered a little&mdash;'and the hope of meeting him hereafter
      enables me to bear existence.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I said I know not what; something about resignation, I believe.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I hope I am resigned; God made me more: so,' she said. 'Oh, Mr. Purcell,
      I have often thought I loved my lost child TOO well. It was natural&mdash;he
      was my only child&mdash;he was&mdash;&mdash;' She could not proceed for a
      few moments: 'It was very natural that I should love him as I did; but it
      may have been sinful; I have often thought so. I doated upon him&mdash;I
      idolised him&mdash;I thought too little of other holier affections; and
      God may have taken him from me, only to teach me, by this severe lesson,
      that I owed to heaven a larger share of my heart than to anything earthly.
      I cannot think of him now without more solemn feelings than if he were
      with me. There is something holy in our thoughts of the dead; I feel it
      so.' After a pause, she continued&mdash;'Mr. Purcell, do you remember his
      features well? they were very beautiful.' I assured her that I did. 'Then
      you can tell me if you think this a faithful likeness.' She took from a
      drawer a case in which lay a miniature. I took it reverently from her
      hands; it was indeed very like&mdash;touchingly like. I told her so; and
      she seemed gratified.
    </p>
    <p>
      As the evening was wearing fast, and I had far to go, I hastened to
      terminate my visit, as I had intended, by placing in her hand a letter
      from her son to me, written during his sojourn upon the Continent. I
      requested her to keep it; it was one in which he spoke much of her, and in
      terms of the tenderest affection. As she read its contents the heavy tears
      gathered in her eyes, and fell, one by one, upon the page; she wiped them
      away, but they still flowed fast and silently. It was in vain that she
      tried to read it; her eyes were filled with tears: so she folded the
      letter, and placed it in her bosom. I rose to depart, and she also rose.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I will not ask you to delay your departure,' said she; 'your visit here
      must have been a painful one to you. I cannot find words to thank you for
      the letter as I would wish, or for all your kindness. It has given me a
      pleasure greater than I thought could have fallen to the lot of a creature
      so very desolate as I am; may God bless you for it!' And thus we parted; I
      never saw Castle Connor or its solitary inmate more.
    </p>
    <h2>
      THE DRUNKARD'S DREAM.
    </h2>
    <p>
      Being a Fourth Extract from the Legacy of the late F. Purcell, P. P. of
      Drumcoolagh.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     'All this HE told with some confusion and
     Dismay, the usual consequence of dreams
     Of the unpleasant kind, with none at hand
     To expound their vain and visionary gleams,
     I've known some odd ones which seemed really planned
     Prophetically, as that which one deems
     "A strange coincidence," to use a phrase
     By which such things are settled nowadays.'
                                            BYRON.
</pre>
    <p>
      Dreams! What age, or what country of the world, has not and acknowledged
      the mystery of their origin and end? I have thought not a little upon the
      subject, seeing it is one which has been often forced upon my attention,
      and sometimes strangely enough; and yet I have never arrived at anything
      which at all appeared a satisfactory conclusion. It does appear that a
      mental phenomenon so extraordinary cannot be wholly without its use. We
      know, indeed, that in the olden times it has been made the organ of
      communication between the Deity and His creatures; and when, as I have
      seen, a dream produces upon a mind, to all appearance hopelessly reprobate
      and depraved, an effect so powerful and so lasting as to break down the
      inveterate habits, and to reform the life of an abandoned sinner, we see
      in the result, in the reformation of morals which appeared incorrigible,
      in the reclamation of a human soul which seemed to be irretrievably lost,
      something more than could be produced by a mere chimera of the slumbering
      fancy, something more than could arise from the capricious images of a
      terrified imagination; but once presented, we behold in all these things,
      and in their tremendous and mysterious results, the operation of the hand
      of God. And while Reason rejects as absurd the superstition which will
      read a prophecy in every dream, she may, without violence to herself,
      recognise, even in the wildest and most incongruous of the wanderings of a
      slumbering intellect, the evidences and the fragments of a language which
      may be spoken, which HAS been spoken, to terrify, to warn, and to command.
      We have reason to believe too, by the promptness of action which in the
      age of the prophets followed all intimations of this kind, and by the
      strength of conviction and strange permanence of the effects resulting
      from certain dreams in latter times, which effects we ourselves may have
      witnessed, that when this medium of communication has been employed by the
      Deity, the evidences of His presence have been unequivocal. My thoughts
      were directed to this subject, in a manner to leave a lasting impression
      upon my mind, by the events which I shall now relate, the statement of
      which, however extraordinary, is nevertheless ACCURATELY CORRECT.
    </p>
    <p>
      About the year 17&mdash;, having been appointed to the living of C&mdash;-h,
      I rented a small house in the town, which bears the same name: one morning
      in the month of November, I was awakened before my usual time by my
      servant, who bustled into my bedroom for the purpose of announcing a sick
      call. As the Catholic Church holds her last rites to be totally
      indispensable to the safety of the departing sinner, no conscientious
      clergyman can afford a moment's unnecessary delay, and in little more than
      five minutes I stood ready cloaked and booted for the road, in the small
      front parlour, in which the messenger, who was to act as my guide, awaited
      my coming. I found a poor little girl crying piteously near the door, and
      after some slight difficulty I ascertained that her father was either dead
      or just dying.
    </p>
    <p>
      'And what may be your father's name, my poor child?' said I. She held down
      her head, as if ashamed. I repeated the question, and the wretched little
      creature burst into floods of tears still more bitter than she had shed
      before. At length, almost provoked by conduct which appeared to me so
      unreasonable, I began to lose patience, spite of the pity which I could
      not help feeling towards her, and I said rather harshly:
    </p>
    <p>
      'If you will not tell me the name of the person to whom you would lead me,
      your silence can arise from no good motive, and I might be justified in
      refusing to go with you at all.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh, don't say that&mdash;don't say that!' cried she. 'Oh, sir, it was
      that I was afeard of when I would not tell you&mdash;I was afeard, when
      you heard his name, you would not come with me; but it is no use hidin' it
      now&mdash;it's Pat Connell, the carpenter, your honour.'
    </p>
    <p>
      She looked in my face with the most earnest anxiety, as if her very
      existence depended upon what she should read there; but I relieved her at
      once. The name, indeed, was most unpleasantly familiar to me; but, however
      fruitless my visits and advice might have been at another time, the
      present was too fearful an occasion to suffer my doubts of their utility
      or my reluctance to re-attempting what appeared a hopeless task to weigh
      even against the lightest chance that a consciousness of his imminent
      danger might produce in him a more docile and tractable disposition.
      Accordingly I told the child to lead the way, and followed her in silence.
      She hurried rapidly through the long narrow street which forms the great
      thoroughfare of the town. The darkness of the hour, rendered still deeper
      by the close approach of the old-fashioned houses, which lowered in tall
      obscurity on either side of the way; the damp, dreary chill which renders
      the advance of morning peculiarly cheerless, combined with the object of
      my walk, to visit the death-bed of a presumptuous sinner, to endeavour,
      almost against my own conviction, to infuse a hope into the heart of a
      dying reprobate&mdash;a drunkard but too probably perishing under the
      consequences of some mad fit of intoxication; all these circumstances
      united served to enhance the gloom and solemnity of my feelings, as I
      silently followed my little guide, who with quick steps traversed the
      uneven pavement of the main street. After a walk of about five minutes she
      turned off into a narrow lane, of that obscure and comfortless class which
      is to be found in almost all small oldfashioned towns, chill, without
      ventilation, reeking with all manner of offensive effluviae, and lined by
      dingy, smoky, sickly and pent-up buildings, frequently not only in a
      wretched but in a dangerous condition.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Your father has changed his abode since I last visited him, and, I am
      afraid, much for the worse,' said I.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Indeed he has, sir; but we must not complain,' replied she. 'We have to
      thank God that we have lodging and food, though it's poor enough, it is,
      your honour.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Poor child! thought I, how many an older head might learn wisdom from thee&mdash;how
      many a luxurious philosopher, who is skilled to preach but not to suffer,
      might not thy patient words put to the blush! The manner and language of
      this child were alike above her years and station; and, indeed, in all
      cases in which the cares and sorrows of life have anticipated their usual
      date, and have fallen, as they sometimes do, with melancholy prematurity
      to the lot of childhood, I have observed the result to have proved
      uniformly the same. A young mind, to which joy and indulgence have been
      strangers, and to which suffering and self-denial have been familiarised
      from the first, acquires a solidity and an elevation which no other
      discipline could have bestowed, and which, in the present case,
      communicated a striking but mournful peculiarity to the manners, even to
      the voice, of the child. We paused before a narrow, crazy door, which she
      opened by means of a latch, and we forthwith began to ascend the steep and
      broken stairs which led upwards to the sick man's room.
    </p>
    <p>
      As we mounted flight after flight towards the garret-floor, I heard more
      and more distinctly the hurried talking of many voices. I could also
      distinguish the low sobbing of a female. On arriving upon the uppermost
      lobby these sounds became fully audible.
    </p>
    <p>
      'This way, your honour,' said my little conductress; at the same time,
      pushing open a door of patched and half-rotten plank, she admitted me into
      the squalid chamber of death and misery. But one candle, held in the
      fingers of a scared and haggard-looking child, was burning in the room,
      and that so dim that all was twilight or darkness except within its
      immediate influence. The general obscurity, however, served to throw into
      prominent and startling relief the death-bed and its occupant. The light
      was nearly approximated to, and fell with horrible clearness upon, the
      blue and swollen features of the drunkard. I did not think it possible
      that a human countenance could look so terrific. The lips were black and
      drawn apart; the teeth were firmly set; the eyes a little unclosed, and
      nothing but the whites appearing. Every feature was fixed and livid, and
      the whole face wore a ghastly and rigid expression of despairing terror
      such as I never saw equalled. His hands were crossed upon his breast, and
      firmly clenched; while, as if to add to the corpse-like effect of the
      whole, some white cloths, dipped in water, were wound about the forehead
      and temples.
    </p>
    <p>
      As soon as I could remove my eyes from this horrible spectacle, I observed
      my friend Dr. D&mdash;&mdash;, one of the most humane of a humane
      profession, standing by the bedside. He had been attempting, but
      unsuccessfully, to bleed the patient, and had now applied his finger to
      the pulse.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Is there any hope?' I inquired in a whisper.
    </p>
    <p>
      A shake of the head was the reply. There was a pause while he continued to
      hold the wrist; but he waited in vain for the throb of life&mdash;it was
      not there: and when he let go the hand, it fell stiffly back into its
      former position upon the other.
    </p>
    <p>
      'The man is dead,' said the physician, as he turned from the bed where the
      terrible figure lay.
    </p>
    <p>
      Dead! thought I, scarcely venturing to look upon the tremendous and
      revolting spectacle. Dead! without an hour for repentance, even a moment
      for reflection; dead I without the rites which even the best should have.
      Is there a hope for him? The glaring eyeball, the grinning mouth, the
      distorted brow&mdash;that unutterable look in which a painter would have
      sought to embody the fixed despair of the nethermost hell. These were my
      answer.
    </p>
    <p>
      The poor wife sat at a little distance, crying as if her heart would break&mdash;the
      younger children clustered round the bed, looking with wondering curiosity
      upon the form of death never seen before.
    </p>
    <p>
      When the first tumult of uncontrollable sorrow had passed away, availing
      myself of the solemnity and impressiveness of the scene, I desired the
      heart-stricken family to accompany me in prayer, and all knelt down while
      I solemnly and fervently repeated some of those prayers which appeared
      most applicable to the occasion. I employed myself thus in a manner which,
      I trusted, was not unprofitable, at least to the living, for about ten
      minutes; and having accomplished my task, I was the first to arise.
    </p>
    <p>
      I looked upon the poor, sobbing, helpless creatures who knelt so humbly
      around me, and my heart bled for them. With a natural transition I turned
      my eyes from them to the bed in which the body lay; and, great God! what
      was the revulsion, the horror which I experienced on seeing the
      corpse-like terrific thing seated half upright before me; the white cloths
      which had been wound about the head had now partly slipped from their
      position, and were hanging in grotesque festoons about the face and
      shoulders, while the distorted eyes leered from amid them&mdash;
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
          'A sight to dream of, not to tell.'
</pre>
    <p>
      I stood actually riveted to the spot. The figure nodded its head and
      lifted its arm, I thought, with a menacing gesture. A thousand confused
      and horrible thoughts at once rushed upon my mind. I had often read that
      the body of a presumptuous sinner, who, during life, had been the willing
      creature of every satanic impulse, after the human tenant had deserted it,
      had been known to become the horrible sport of demoniac possession.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was roused from the stupefaction of terror in which I stood, by the
      piercing scream of the mother, who now, for the first time, perceived the
      change which had taken place. She rushed towards the bed, but stunned by
      the shock, and overcome by the conflict of violent emotions, before she
      reached it she fell prostrate upon the floor.
    </p>
    <p>
      I am perfectly convinced that had I not been startled from the torpidity
      of horror in which I was bound by some powerful and arousing stimulant, I
      should have gazed upon this unearthly apparition until I had fairly lost
      my senses. As it was, however, the spell was broken&mdash;superstition
      gave way to reason: the man whom all believed to have been actually dead
      was living!
    </p>
    <p>
      Dr. D&mdash;&mdash; was instantly standing by the bedside, and upon
      examination he found that a sudden and copious flow of blood had taken
      place from the wound which the lancet had left; and this, no doubt, had
      effected his sudden and almost preternatural restoration to an existence
      from which all thought he had been for ever removed. The man was still
      speechless, but he seemed to understand the physician when he forbid his
      repeating the painful and fruitless attempts which he made to articulate,
      and he at once resigned himself quietly into his hands.
    </p>
    <p>
      I left the patient with leeches upon his temples, and bleeding freely,
      apparently with little of the drowsiness which accompanies apoplexy;
      indeed, Dr. D&mdash;&mdash; told me that he had never before witnessed a
      seizure which seemed to combine the symptoms of so many kinds, and yet
      which belonged to none of the recognised classes; it certainly was not
      apoplexy, catalepsy, nor delirium tremens, and yet it seemed, in some
      degree, to partake of the properties of all. It was strange, but stranger
      things are coming.
    </p>
    <p>
      During two or three days Dr. D&mdash;&mdash; would not allow his patient
      to converse in a manner which could excite or exhaust him, with anyone; he
      suffered him merely as briefly as possible to express his immediate wants.
      And it was not until the fourth day after my early visit, the particulars
      of which I have just detailed, that it was thought expedient that I should
      see him, and then only because it appeared that his extreme importunity
      and impatience to meet me were likely to retard his recovery more than the
      mere exhaustion attendant upon a short conversation could possibly do;
      perhaps, too, my friend entertained some hope that if by holy confession
      his patient's bosom were eased of the perilous stuff which no doubt
      oppressed it, his recovery would be more assured and rapid. It was then,
      as I have said, upon the fourth day after my first professional call, that
      I found myself once more in the dreary chamber of want and sickness.
    </p>
    <p>
      The man was in bed, and appeared low and restless. On my entering the room
      he raised himself in the bed, and muttered, twice or thrice:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Thank God! thank God!'
    </p>
    <p>
      I signed to those of his family who stood by to leave the room, and took a
      chair beside the bed. So soon as we were alone, he said, rather doggedly:
    </p>
    <p>
      'There's no use in telling me of the sinfulness of bad ways&mdash;I know
      it all. I know where they lead to&mdash;I seen everything about it with my
      own eyesight, as plain as I see you.' He rolled himself in the bed, as if
      to hide his face in the clothes; and then suddenly raising himself, he
      exclaimed with startling vehemence: 'Look, sir! there is no use in mincing
      the matter: I'm blasted with the fires of hell; I have been in hell. What
      do you think of that? In hell&mdash;I'm lost for ever&mdash;I have not a
      chance. I am damned already&mdash;damned&mdash;damned!'
    </p>
    <p>
      The end of this sentence he actually shouted. His vehemence was perfectly
      terrific; he threw himself back, and laughed, and sobbed hysterically. I
      poured some water into a tea-cup, and gave it to him. After he had
      swallowed it, I told him if he had anything to communicate, to do so as
      briefly as he could, and in a manner as little agitating to himself as
      possible; threatening at the same time, though I had no intention of doing
      so, to leave him at once, in case he again gave way to such passionate
      excitement.
    </p>
    <p>
      'It's only foolishness,' he continued, 'for me to try to thank you for
      coming to such a villain as myself at all. It's no use for me to wish good
      to you, or to bless you; for such as me has no blessings to give.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I told him that I had but done my duty, and urged him to proceed to the
      matter which weighed upon his mind. He then spoke nearly as follows:
    </p>
    <p>
      'I came in drunk on Friday night last, and got to my bed here; I don't
      remember how. Sometime in the night it seemed to me I wakened, and feeling
      unasy in myself, I got up out of the bed. I wanted the fresh air; but I
      would not make a noise to open the window, for fear I'd waken the
      crathurs. It was very dark and throublesome to find the door; but at last
      I did get it, and I groped my way out, and went down as asy as I could. I
      felt quite sober, and I counted the steps one after another, as I was
      going down, that I might not stumble at the bottom.
    </p>
    <p>
      'When I came to the first landing-place&mdash;God be about us always!&mdash;the
      floor of it sunk under me, and I went down&mdash;down&mdash;down, till the
      senses almost left me. I do not know how long I was falling, but it seemed
      to me a great while. When I came rightly to myself at last, I was sitting
      near the top of a great table; and I could not see the end of it, if it
      had any, it was so far off. And there was men beyond reckoning, sitting
      down all along by it, at each side, as far as I could see at all. I did
      not know at first was it in the open air; but there was a close smothering
      feel in it that was not natural. And there was a kind of light that my
      eyesight never saw before, red and unsteady; and I did not see for a long
      time where it was coming from, until I looked straight up, and then I seen
      that it came from great balls of blood-coloured fire that were rolling
      high over head with a sort of rushing, trembling sound, and I perceived
      that they shone on the ribs of a great roof of rock that was arched
      overhead instead of the sky. When I seen this, scarce knowing what I did,
      I got up, and I said, "I have no right to be here; I must go." And the man
      that was sitting at my left hand only smiled, and said, "Sit down again;
      you can NEVER leave this place." And his voice was weaker than any child's
      voice I ever heerd; and when he was done speaking he smiled again.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Then I spoke out very loud and bold, and I said, "In the name of God, let
      me out of this bad place." And there was a great man that I did not see
      before, sitting at the end of the table that I was near; and he was taller
      than twelve men, and his face was very proud and terrible to look at. And
      he stood up and stretched out his hand before him; and when he stood up,
      all that was there, great and small, bowed down with a sighing sound, and
      a dread came on my heart, and he looked at me, and I could not speak. I
      felt I was his own, to do what he liked with, for I knew at once who he
      was; and he said, "If you promise to return, you may depart for a season;"
      and the voice he spoke with was terrible and mournful, and the echoes of
      it went rolling and swelling down the endless cave, and mixing with the
      trembling of the fire overhead; so that when he sat down there was a sound
      after him, all through the place, like the roaring of a furnace, and I
      said, with all the strength I had, "I promise to come back&mdash;in God's
      name let me go!"
    </p>
    <p>
      'And with that I lost the sight and the hearing of all that was there, and
      when my senses came to me again, I was sitting in the bed with the blood
      all over me, and you and the rest praying around the room.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Here he paused and wiped away the chill drops of horror which hung upon
      his forehead.
    </p>
    <p>
      I remained silent for some moments. The vision which he had just described
      struck my imagination not a little, for this was long before Vathek and
      the 'Hall of Eblis' had delighted the world; and the description which he
      gave had, as I received it, all the attractions of novelty beside the
      impressiveness which always belongs to the narration of an EYE-WITNESS,
      whether in the body or in the spirit, of the scenes which he describes.
      There was something, too, in the stern horror with which the man related
      these things, and in the incongruity of his description, with the vulgarly
      received notions of the great place of punishment, and of its presiding
      spirit, which struck my mind with awe, almost with fear. At length he
      said, with an expression of horrible, imploring earnestness, which I shall
      never forget&mdash;'Well, sir, is there any hope; is there any chance at
      all? or, is my soul pledged and promised away for ever? is it gone out of
      my power? must I go back to the place?'
    </p>
    <p>
      In answering him, I had no easy task to perform; for however clear might
      be my internal conviction of the groundlessness of his tears, and however
      strong my scepticism respecting the reality of what he had described, I
      nevertheless felt that his impression to the contrary, and his humility
      and terror resulting from it, might be made available as no mean engines
      in the work of his conversion from prodigacy, and of his restoration to
      decent habits, and to religious feeling.
    </p>
    <p>
      I therefore told him that he was to regard his dream rather in the light
      of a warning than in that of a prophecy; that our salvation depended not
      upon the word or deed of a moment, but upon the habits of a life; that, in
      fine, if he at once discarded his idle companions and evil habits, and
      firmly adhered to a sober, industrious, and religious course of life, the
      powers of darkness might claim his soul in vain, for that there were
      higher and firmer pledges than human tongue could utter, which promised
      salvation to him who should repent and lead a new life.
    </p>
    <p>
      I left him much comforted, and with a promise to return upon the next day.
      I did so, and found him much more cheerful and without any remains of the
      dogged sullenness which I suppose had arisen from his despair. His
      promises of amendment were given in that tone of deliberate earnestness,
      which belongs to deep and solemn determination; and it was with no small
      delight that I observed, after repeated visits, that his good resolutions,
      so far from failing, did but gather strength by time; and when I saw that
      man shake off the idle and debauched companions, whose society had for
      years formed alike his amusement and his ruin, and revive his long
      discarded habits of industry and sobriety, I said within myself, there is
      something more in all this than the operation of an idle dream.
    </p>
    <p>
      One day, sometime after his perfect restoration to health, I was surprised
      on ascending the stairs, for the purpose of visiting this man, to find him
      busily employed in nailing down some planks upon the landing-place,
      through which, at the commencement of his mysterious vision, it seemed to
      him that he had sunk. I perceived at once that he was strengthening the
      floor with a view to securing himself against such a catastrophe, and
      could scarcely forbear a smile as I bid 'God bless his work.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He perceived my thoughts, I suppose, for he immediately said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'I can never pass over that floor without trembling. I'd leave this house
      if I could, but I can't find another lodging in the town so cheap, and
      I'll not take a better till I've paid off all my debts, please God; but I
      could not be asy in my mind till I made it as safe as I could. You'll
      hardly believe me, your honour, that while I'm working, maybe a mile away,
      my heart is in a flutter the whole way back, with the bare thoughts of the
      two little steps I have to walk upon this bit of a floor. So it's no
      wonder, sir, I'd thry to make it sound and firm with any idle timber I
      have.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I applauded his resolution to pay off his debts, and the steadiness with
      which he perused his plans of conscientious economy, and passed on.
    </p>
    <p>
      Many months elapsed, and still there appeared no alteration in his
      resolutions of amendment. He was a good workman, and with his better
      habits he recovered his former extensive and profitable employment.
      Everything seemed to promise comfort and respectability. I have little
      more to add, and that shall be told quickly. I had one evening met Pat
      Connell, as he returned from his work, and as usual, after a mutual, and
      on his side respectful salutation, I spoke a few words of encouragement
      and approval. I left him industrious, active, healthy&mdash;when next I
      saw him, not three days after, he was a corpse.
    </p>
    <p>
      The circumstances which marked the event of his death were somewhat
      strange&mdash;I might say fearful. The unfortunate man had accidentally
      met an early friend just returned, after a long absence, and in a moment
      of excitement, forgetting everything in the warmth of his joy, he yielded
      to his urgent invitation to accompany him into a public-house, which lay
      close by the spot where the encounter had taken place. Connell, however,
      previously to entering the room, had announced his determination to take
      nothing more than the strictest temperance would warrant.
    </p>
    <p>
      But oh! who can describe the inveterate tenacity with which a drunkard's
      habits cling to him through life? He may repent&mdash;he may reform&mdash;he
      may look with actual abhorrence upon his past profligacy; but amid all
      this reformation and compunction, who can tell the moment in which the
      base and ruinous propensity may not recur, triumphing over resolution,
      remorse, shame, everything, and prostrating its victim once more in all
      that is destructive and revolting in that fatal vice?
    </p>
    <p>
      The wretched man left the place in a state of utter intoxication. He was
      brought home nearly insensible, and placed in his bed, where he lay in the
      deep calm lethargy of drunkenness. The younger part of the family retired
      to rest much after their usual hour; but the poor wife remained up sitting
      by the fire, too much grieved and shocked at the occurrence of what she
      had so little expected, to settle to rest; fatigue, however, at length
      overcame her, and she sank gradually into an uneasy slumber. She could not
      tell how long she had remained in this state, when she awakened, and
      immediately on opening her eyes, she perceived by the faint red light of
      the smouldering turf embers, two persons, one of whom she recognised as
      her husband, noiselessly gliding out of the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Pat, darling, where are you going?' said she. There was no answer&mdash;the
      door closed after them; but in a moment she was startled and terrified by
      a loud and heavy crash, as if some ponderous body had been hurled down the
      stair. Much alarmed, she started up, and going to the head of the
      staircase, she called repeatedly upon her husband, but in vain. She
      returned to the room, and with the assistance of her daughter, whom I had
      occasion to mention before, she succeeded in finding and lighting a
      candle, with which she hurried again to the head of the staircase.
    </p>
    <p>
      At the bottom lay what seemed to be a bundle of clothes, heaped together,
      motionless, lifeless&mdash;it was her husband. In going down the stair,
      for what purpose can never now be known, he had fallen helplessly and
      violently to the bottom, and coming head foremost, the spine at the neck
      had been dislocated by the shock, and instant death must have ensued. The
      body lay upon that landing-place to which his dream had referred. It is
      scarcely worth endeavouring to clear up a single point in a narrative
      where all is mystery; yet I could not help suspecting that the second
      figure which had been seen in the room by Connell's wife on the night of
      his death, might have been no other than his own shadow. I suggested this
      solution of the difficulty; but she told me that the unknown person had
      been considerably in advance of the other, and on reaching the door, had
      turned back as if to communicate something to his companion. It was then a
      mystery.
    </p>
    <p>
      Was the dream verified?&mdash;whither had the disembodied spirit sped?&mdash;who
      can say? We know not. But I left the house of death that day in a state of
      horror which I could not describe. It seemed to me that I was scarce
      awake. I heard and saw everything as if under the spell of a night-mare.
      The coincidence was terrible.
    </p>


    <h2>
      PASSAGE IN THE SECRET HISTORY OF AN IRISH COUNTESS.
    </h2>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     Being a Fifth Extract from the Legacy of the late Francis
     Purcell, P.P. of Drumcoolagh.
</pre>
    <p>
      The following paper is written in a female hand, and was no doubt
      communicated to my much-regretted friend by the lady whose early history
      it serves to illustrate, the Countess D&mdash;&mdash;. She is no more&mdash;she
      long since died, a childless and a widowed wife, and, as her letter sadly
      predicts, none survive to whom the publication of this narrative can prove
      'injurious, or even painful.' Strange! two powerful and wealthy families,
      that in which she was born, and that into which she had married, have
      ceased to be&mdash;they are utterly extinct.
    </p>
    <p>
      To those who know anything of the history of Irish families, as they were
      less than a century ago, the facts which immediately follow will at once
      suggest THE NAMES of the principal actors; and to others their publication
      would be useless&mdash;to us, possibly, if not probably, injurious. I
      have, therefore, altered such of the names as might, if stated, get us
      into difficulty; others, belonging to minor characters in the strange
      story, I have left untouched.
    </p>
    <p>
      My dear friend,&mdash;You have asked me to furnish you with a detail of
      the strange events which marked my early history, and I have, without
      hesitation, applied myself to the task, knowing that, while I live, a kind
      consideration for my feelings will prevent your giving publicity to the
      statement; and conscious that, when I am no more, there will not survive
      one to whom the narrative can prove injurious, or even painful.
    </p>
    <p>
      My mother died when I was quite an infant, and of her I have no
      recollection, even the faintest. By her death, my education and habits
      were left solely to the guidance of my surviving parent; and, as far as a
      stern attention to my religious instruction, and an active anxiety evinced
      by his procuring for me the best masters to perfect me in those
      accomplishments which my station and wealth might seem to require, could
      avail, he amply discharged the task.
    </p>
    <p>
      My father was what is called an oddity, and his treatment of me, though
      uniformly kind, flowed less from affection and tenderness than from a
      sense of obligation and duty. Indeed, I seldom even spoke to him except at
      meal-times, and then his manner was silent and abrupt; his leisure hours,
      which were many, were passed either in his study or in solitary walks; in
      short, he seemed to take no further interest in my happiness or
      improvement than a conscientious regard to the discharge of his own duty
      would seem to claim.
    </p>
    <p>
      Shortly before my birth a circumstance had occurred which had contributed
      much to form and to confirm my father's secluded habits&mdash;it was the
      fact that a suspicion of MURDER had fallen upon his younger brother,
      though not sufficiently definite to lead to an indictment, yet strong
      enough to ruin him in public opinion.
    </p>
    <p>
      This disgraceful and dreadful doubt cast upon the family name, my father
      felt deeply and bitterly, and not the less so that he himself was
      thoroughly convinced of his brother's innocence. The sincerity and
      strength of this impression he shortly afterwards proved in a manner which
      produced the dark events which follow. Before, however, I enter upon the
      statement of them, I ought to relate the circumstances which had awakened
      the suspicion; inasmuch as they are in themselves somewhat curious, and,
      in their effects, most intimately connected with my after-history.
    </p>
    <p>
      My uncle, Sir Arthur T&mdash;&mdash;n, was a gay and extravagant man, and,
      among other vices, was ruinously addicted to gaming; this unfortunate
      propensity, even after his fortune had suffered so severely as to render
      inevitable a reduction in his expenses by no means inconsiderable,
      nevertheless continued to actuate him, nearly to the exclusion of all
      other pursuits; he was, however, a proud, or rather a vain man, and could
      not bear to make the diminution of his income a matter of gratulation and
      triumph to those with whom he had hitherto competed, and the consequence
      was, that he frequented no longer the expensive haunts of dissipation, and
      retired from the gay world, leaving his coterie to discover his reasons as
      best they might.
    </p>
    <p>
      He did not, however, forego his favourite vice, for, though he could not
      worship his great divinity in the costly temples where it was formerly his
      wont to take his stand, yet he found it very possible to bring about him a
      sufficient number of the votaries of chance to answer all his ends. The
      consequence was, that Carrickleigh, which was the name of my uncle's
      residence, was never without one or more of such visitors as I have
      described.
    </p>
    <p>
      It happened that upon one occasion he was visited by one Hugh Tisdall, a
      gentleman of loose habits, but of considerable wealth, and who had, in
      early youth, travelled with my uncle upon the Continent; the period of his
      visit was winter, and, consequently, the house was nearly deserted
      excepting by its regular inmates; it was therefore highly acceptable,
      particularly as my uncle was aware that his visitor's tastes accorded
      exactly with his own.
    </p>
    <p>
      Both parties seemed determined to avail themselves of their suitability
      during the brief stay which Mr. Tisdall had promised; the consequence was,
      that they shut themselves up in Sir Arthur's private room for nearly all
      the day and the greater part of the night, during the space of nearly a
      week, at the end of which the servant having one morning, as usual,
      knocked at Mr. Tisdall's bedroom door repeatedly, received no answer, and,
      upon attempting to enter, found that it was locked; this appeared
      suspicious, and, the inmates of the house having been alarmed, the door
      was forced open, and, on proceeding to the bed, they found the body of its
      occupant perfectly lifeless, and hanging half-way out, the head downwards,
      and near the floor. One deep wound had been inflicted upon the temple,
      apparently with some blunt instrument which had penetrated the brain; and
      another blow, less effective, probably the first aimed, had grazed the
      head, removing some of the scalp, but leaving the skull untouched. The
      door had been double-locked upon the INSIDE, in evidence of which the key
      still lay where it had been placed in the lock.
    </p>
    <p>
      The window, though not secured on the interior, was closed&mdash;a
      circumstance not a little puzzling, as it afforded the only other mode of
      escape from the room; it looked out, too, upon a kind of courtyard, round
      which the old buildings stood, formerly accessible by a narrow doorway and
      passage lying in the oldest side of the quadrangle, but which had since
      been built up, so as to preclude all ingress or egress; the room was also
      upon the second story, and the height of the window considerable. Near the
      bed were found a pair of razors belonging to the murdered man, one of them
      upon the ground, and both of them open. The weapon which had inflicted the
      mortal wound was not to be found in the room, nor were any footsteps or
      other traces of the murderer discoverable.
    </p>
    <p>
      At the suggestion of Sir Arthur himself, a coroner was instantly summoned
      to attend, and an inquest was held; nothing, however, in any degree
      conclusive was elicited; the walls, ceiling, and floor of the room were
      carefully examined, in order to ascertain whether they contained a
      trap-door or other concealed mode of entrance&mdash;but no such thing
      appeared.
    </p>
    <p>
      Such was the minuteness of investigation employed, that, although the
      grate had contained a large fire during the night, they proceeded to
      examine even the very chimney, in order to discover whether escape by it
      were possible; but this attempt, too, was fruitless, for the chimney,
      built in the old fashion, rose in a perfectly perpendicular line from the
      hearth to a height of nearly fourteen feet above the roof, affording in
      its interior scarcely the possibility of ascent, the flue being smoothly
      plastered, and sloping towards the top like an inverted funnel, promising,
      too, even if the summit were attained, owing to its great height, but a
      precarious descent upon the sharp and steep-ridged roof; the ashes, too,
      which lay in the grate, and the soot, as far as it could be seen, were
      undisturbed, a circumstance almost conclusive of the question.
    </p>
    <p>
      Sir Arthur was of course examined; his evidence was given with clearness
      and unreserve, which seemed calculated to silence all suspicion. He stated
      that, up to the day and night immediately preceding the catastrophe, he
      had lost to a heavy amount, but that, at their last sitting, he had not
      only won back his original loss, but upwards of four thousand pounds in
      addition; in evidence of which he produced an acknowledgment of debt to
      that amount in the handwriting of the deceased, and bearing the date of
      the fatal night. He had mentioned the circumstance to his lady, and in
      presence of some of the domestics; which statement was supported by THEIR
      respective evidence.
    </p>
    <p>
      One of the jury shrewdly observed, that the circumstance of Mr. Tisdall's
      having sustained so heavy a loss might have suggested to some ill-minded
      persons accidentally hearing it, the plan of robbing him, after having
      murdered him in such a manner as might make it appear that he had
      committed suicide; a supposition which was strongly supported by the
      razors having been found thus displaced, and removed from their case. Two
      persons had probably been engaged in the attempt, one watching by the
      sleeping man, and ready to strike him in case of his awakening suddenly,
      while the other was procuring the razors and employed in inflicting the
      fatal gash, so as to make it appear to have been the act of the murdered
      man himself. It was said that while the juror was making this suggestion
      Sir Arthur changed colour.
    </p>
    <p>
      Nothing, however, like legal evidence appeared against him, and the
      consequence was that the verdict was found against a person or persons
      unknown; and for some time the matter was suffered to rest, until, after
      about five months, my father received a letter from a person signing
      himself Andrew Collis, and representing himself to be the cousin of the
      deceased. This letter stated that Sir Arthur was likely to incur not
      merely suspicion, but personal risk, unless he could account for certain
      circumstances connected with the recent murder, and contained a copy of a
      letter written by the deceased, and bearing date, the day of the week, and
      of the month, upon the night of which the deed of blood had been
      perpetrated. Tisdall's note ran as follows:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     'DEAR COLLIS,

     'I have had sharp work with Sir Arthur; he tried some of his stale
     tricks, but soon found that <i>I</i> was Yorkshire too: it would not
     do&mdash;you understand me. We went to the work like good ones, head,
     heart and soul; and, in fact, since I came here, I have lost no time. I
     am rather fagged, but I am sure to be well paid for my hardship; I never
     want sleep so long as I can have the music of a dice-box, and
     wherewithal to pay the piper. As I told you, he tried some of his queer
     turns, but I foiled him like a man, and, in return, gave him more than
     he could relish of the genuine DEAD KNOWLEDGE.

      'In short, I have plucked the old baronet as never baronet was plucked
      before; I have scarce left him the stump of a quill; I have got promissory
      notes in his hand to the amount of&mdash;if you like round numbers, say,
      thirty thousand pounds, safely deposited in my portable strong-box, alias
      double-clasped pocket-book. I leave this ruinous old rat-hole early on
      to-morrow, for two reasons&mdash;first, I do not want to play with Sir
      Arthur deeper than I think his security, that is, his money, or his
      money's worth, would warrant; and, secondly, because I am safer a hundred
      miles from Sir Arthur than in the house with him. Look you, my worthy, I
      tell you this between ourselves&mdash;I may be wrong, but, by G&mdash;, I
      am as sure as that I am now living, that Sir A&mdash;&mdash; attempted to
      poison me last night; so much for old friendship on both sides.

      'When I won the last stake, a heavy one enough, my friend leant his
      forehead upon his hands, and you'll laugh when I tell you that his head
      literally smoked like a hot dumpling. I do not know whether his agitation
      was produced by the plan which he had against me, or by his having lost so
      heavily&mdash;though it must be allowed that he had reason to be a little
      funked, whichever way his thoughts went; but he pulled the bell, and
      ordered two bottles of champagne. While the fellow was bringing them he
      drew out a promissory note to the full amount, which he signed, and, as
      the man came in with the bottles and glasses, he desired him to be off; he
      filled out a glass for me, and, while he thought my eyes were off, for I
      was putting up his note at the time, he dropped something slyly into it,
      no doubt to sweeten it; but I saw it all, and, when he handed it to me, I
      said, with an emphasis which he might or might not understand:

      '"There is some sediment in this; I'll not drink it."

      '"Is there?" said he, and at the same time snatched it from my hand and
      threw it into the fire. What do you think of that? have I not a tender
      chicken to manage? Win or lose, I will not play beyond five thousand
      to-night, and to-morrow sees me safe out of the reach of Sir Arthur's
      champagne. So, all things considered, I think you must allow that you are
      not the last who have found a knowing boy in

'Yours to command,

'HUGH TISDALL.'
</pre>
    <p>
      Of the authenticity of this document I never heard my father express a
      doubt; and I am satisfied that, owing to his strong conviction in favour
      of his brother, he would not have admitted it without sufficient inquiry,
      inasmuch as it tended to confirm the suspicions which already existed to
      his prejudice.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now, the only point in this letter which made strongly against my uncle,
      was the mention of the 'double-clasped pocket-book' as the receptacle of
      the papers likely to involve him, for this pocket-book was not
      forthcoming, nor anywhere to be found, nor had any papers referring to his
      gaming transactions been found upon the dead man. However, whatever might
      have been the original intention of this Collis, neither my uncle nor my
      father ever heard more of him; but he published the letter in Faulkner's
      newspaper, which was shortly afterwards made the vehicle of a much more
      mysterious attack. The passage in that periodical to which I allude,
      occurred about four years afterwards, and while the fatal occurrence was
      still fresh in public recollection. It commenced by a rambling preface,
      stating that 'a CERTAIN PERSON whom CERTAIN persons thought to be dead,
      was not so, but living, and in full possession of his memory, and moreover
      ready and able to make GREAT delinquents tremble.' It then went on to
      describe the murder, without, however, mentioning names; and in doing so,
      it entered into minute and circumstantial particulars of which none but an
      EYE-WITNESS could have been possessed, and by implications almost too
      unequivocal to be regarded in the light of insinuation, to involve the
      'TITLED GAMBLER' in the guilt of the transaction.
    </p>
    <p>
      My father at once urged Sir Arthur to proceed against the paper in an
      action of libel; but he would not hear of it, nor consent to my father's
      taking any legal steps whatever in the matter. My father, however, wrote
      in a threatening tone to Faulkner, demanding a surrender of the author of
      the obnoxious article. The answer to this application is still in my
      possession, and is penned in an apologetic tone: it states that the
      manuscript had been handed in, paid for, and inserted as an advertisement,
      without sufficient inquiry, or any knowledge as to whom it referred.
    </p>
    <p>
      No step, however, was taken to clear my uncle's character in the judgment
      of the public; and as he immediately sold a small property, the
      application of the proceeds of which was known to none, he was said to
      have disposed of it to enable himself to buy off the threatened
      information. However the truth might have been, it is certain that no
      charges respecting the mysterious murder were afterwards publicly made
      against my uncle, and, as far as external disturbances were concerned, he
      enjoyed henceforward perfect security and quiet.
    </p>
    <p>
      A deep and lasting impression, however, had been made upon the public
      mind, and Sir Arthur T&mdash;&mdash;n was no longer visited or noticed by
      the gentry and aristocracy of the county, whose attention and courtesies
      he had hitherto received. He accordingly affected to despise these
      enjoyments which he could not procure, and shunned even that society which
      he might have commanded.
    </p>
    <p>
      This is all that I need recapitulate of my uncle's history, and I now
      recur to my own. Although my father had never, within my recollection,
      visited, or been visited by, my uncle, each being of sedentary,
      procrastinating, and secluded habits, and their respective residences
      being very far apart&mdash;the one lying in the county of Galway, the
      other in that of Cork&mdash;he was strongly attached to his brother, and
      evinced his affection by an active correspondence, and by deeply and
      proudly resenting that neglect which had marked Sir Arthur as unfit to mix
      in society.
    </p>
    <p>
      When I was about eighteen years of age, my father, whose health had been
      gradually declining, died, leaving me in heart wretched and desolate, and,
      owing to his previous seclusion, with few acquaintances, and almost no
      friends.
    </p>
    <p>
      The provisions of his will were curious, and when I had sufficiently come
      to myself to listen to or comprehend them, surprised me not a little: all
      his vast property was left to me, and to the heirs of my body, for ever;
      and, in default of such heirs, it was to go after my death to my uncle,
      Sir Arthur, without any entail.
    </p>
    <p>
      At the same time, the will appointed him my guardian, desiring that I
      might be received within his house, and reside with his family, and under
      his care, during the term of my minority; and in consideration of the
      increased expense consequent upon such an arrangement, a handsome annuity
      was allotted to him during the term of my proposed residence.
    </p>
    <p>
      The object of this last provision I at once understood: my father desired,
      by making it the direct, apparent interest of Sir Arthur that I should die
      without issue, while at the same time he placed me wholly in his power, to
      prove to the world how great and unshaken was his confidence in his
      brother's innocence and honour, and also to afford him an opportunity of
      showing that this mark of confidence was not unworthily bestowed.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was a strange, perhaps an idle scheme; but as I had been always brought
      up in the habit of considering my uncle as a deeply-injured man, and had
      been taught, almost as a part of my religion, to regard him as the very
      soul of honour, I felt no further uneasiness respecting the arrangement
      than that likely to result to a timid girl, of secluded habits, from the
      immediate prospect of taking up her abode for the first time in her life
      among total strangers. Previous to leaving my home, which I felt I should
      do with a heavy heart, I received a most tender and affectionate letter
      from my uncle, calculated, if anything could do so, to remove the
      bitterness of parting from scenes familiar and dear from my earliest
      childhood, and in some degree to reconcile me to the measure.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was during a fine autumn that I approached the old domain of
      Carrickleigh. I shall not soon forget the impression of sadness and of
      gloom which all that I saw produced upon my mind; the sunbeams were
      falling with a rich and melancholy tint upon the fine old trees, which
      stood in lordly groups, casting their long, sweeping shadows over rock and
      sward. There was an air of neglect and decay about the spot, which
      amounted almost to desolation; the symptoms of this increased in number as
      we approached the building itself, near which the ground had been
      originally more artificially and carefully cultivated than elsewhere, and
      whose neglect consequently more immediately and strikingly betrayed
      itself.
    </p>
    <p>
      As we proceeded, the road wound near the beds of what had been formally
      two fish-ponds, which were now nothing more than stagnant swamps,
      overgrown with rank weeds, and here and there encroached upon by the
      straggling underwood; the avenue itself was much broken, and in many
      places the stones were almost concealed by grass and nettles; the loose
      stone walls which had here and there intersected the broad park were, in
      many places, broken down, so as no longer to answer their original purpose
      as fences; piers were now and then to be seen, but the gates were gone;
      and, to add to the general air of dilapidation, some huge trunks were
      lying scattered through the venerable old trees, either the work of the
      winter storms, or perhaps the victims of some extensive but desultory
      scheme of denudation, which the projector had not capital or perseverance
      to carry into full effect.
    </p>
    <p>
      After the carriage had travelled a mile of this avenue, we reached the
      summit of rather an abrupt eminence, one of the many which added to the
      picturesqueness, if not to the convenience of this rude passage. From the
      top of this ridge the grey walls of Carrickleigh were visible, rising at a
      small distance in front, and darkened by the hoary wood which crowded
      around them. It was a quadrangular building of considerable extent, and
      the front which lay towards us, and in which the great entrance was
      placed, bore unequivocal marks of antiquity; the time-worn, solemn aspect
      of the old building, the ruinous and deserted appearance of the whole
      place, and the associations which connected it with a dark page in the
      history of my family, combined to depress spirits already predisposed for
      the reception of sombre and dejecting impressions.
    </p>
    <p>
      When the carriage drew up in the grass-grown court yard before the
      hall-door, two lazy-looking men, whose appearance well accorded with that
      of the place which they tenanted, alarmed by the obstreperous barking of a
      great chained dog, ran out from some half-ruinous out-houses, and took
      charge of the horses; the hall-door stood open, and I entered a gloomy and
      imperfectly lighted apartment, and found no one within. However, I had not
      long to wait in this awkward predicament, for before my luggage had been
      deposited in the house, indeed, before I had well removed my cloak and
      other wraps, so as to enable me to look around, a young girl ran lightly
      into the hall, and kissing me heartily, and somewhat boisterously,
      exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      'My dear cousin, my dear Margaret&mdash;I am so delighted&mdash;so out of
      breath. We did not expect you till ten o'clock; my father is somewhere
      about the place, he must be close at hand. James&mdash;Corney&mdash;run
      out and tell your master&mdash;my brother is seldom at home, at least at
      any reasonable hour&mdash;you must be so tired&mdash;so fatigued&mdash;let
      me show you to your room&mdash;see that Lady Margaret's luggage is all
      brought up&mdash;you must lie down and rest yourself&mdash;Deborah, bring
      some coffee&mdash;up these stairs; we are so delighted to see you&mdash;you
      cannot think how lonely I have been&mdash;how steep these stairs are, are
      not they? I am so glad you are come&mdash;I could hardly bring myself to
      believe that you were really coming&mdash;how good of you, dear Lady
      Margaret.'
    </p>
    <p>
      There was real good-nature and delight in my cousin's greeting, and a kind
      of constitutional confidence of manner which placed me at once at ease,
      and made me feel immediately upon terms of intimacy with her. The room
      into which she ushered me, although partaking in the general air of decay
      which pervaded the mansion and all about it, had nevertheless been fitted
      up with evident attention to comfort, and even with some dingy attempt at
      luxury; but what pleased me most was that it opened, by a second door,
      upon a lobby which communicated with my fair cousin's apartment; a
      circumstance which divested the room, in my eyes, of the air of solitude
      and sadness which would otherwise have characterised it, to a degree
      almost painful to one so dejected in spirits as I was.
    </p>
    <p>
      After such arrangements as I found necessary were completed, we both went
      down to the parlour, a large wainscoted room, hung round with grim old
      portraits, and, as I was not sorry to see, containing in its ample grate a
      large and cheerful fire. Here my cousin had leisure to talk more at her
      ease; and from her I learned something of the manners and the habits of
      the two remaining members of her family, whom I had not yet seen.
    </p>
    <p>
      On my arrival I had known nothing of the family among whom I was come to
      reside, except that it consisted of three individuals, my uncle, and his
      son and daughter, Lady T&mdash;&mdash;n having been long dead. In addition
      to this very scanty stock of information, I shortly learned from my
      communicative companion that my uncle was, as I had suspected, completely
      retired in his habits, and besides that, having been so far back as she
      could well recollect, always rather strict, as reformed rakes frequently
      become, he had latterly been growing more gloomily and sternly religious
      than heretofore.
    </p>
    <p>
      Her account of her brother was far less favourable, though she did not say
      anything directly to his disadvantage. From all that I could gather from
      her, I was led to suppose that he was a specimen of the idle,
      coarse-mannered, profligate, low-minded 'squirearchy'&mdash;a result which
      might naturally have flowed from the circumstance of his being, as it
      were, outlawed from society, and driven for companionship to grades below
      his own&mdash;enjoying, too, the dangerous prerogative of spending much
      money.
    </p>
    <p>
      However, you may easily suppose that I found nothing in my cousin's
      communication fully to bear me out in so very decided a conclusion.
    </p>
    <p>
      I awaited the arrival of my uncle, which was every moment to be expected,
      with feelings half of alarm, half of curiosity&mdash;a sensation which I
      have often since experienced, though to a less degree, when upon the point
      of standing for the first time in the presence of one of whom I have long
      been in the habit of hearing or thinking with interest.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was, therefore, with some little perturbation that I heard, first a
      slight bustle at the outer door, then a slow step traverse the hall, and
      finally witnessed the door open, and my uncle enter the room. He was a
      striking-looking man; from peculiarities both of person and of garb, the
      whole effect of his appearance amounted to extreme singularity. He was
      tall, and when young his figure must have been strikingly elegant; as it
      was, however, its effect was marred by a very decided stoop. His dress was
      of a sober colour, and in fashion anterior to anything which I could
      remember. It was, however, handsome, and by no means carelessly put on;
      but what completed the singularity of his appearance was his uncut, white
      hair, which hung in long, but not at all neglected curls, even so far as
      his shoulders, and which combined with his regularly classic features, and
      fine dark eyes, to bestow upon him an air of venerable dignity and pride,
      which I have never seen equalled elsewhere. I rose as he entered, and met
      him about the middle of the room; he kissed my cheek and both my hands,
      saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      'You are most welcome, dear child, as welcome as the command of this poor
      place and all that it contains can make you. I am most rejoiced to see you&mdash;truly
      rejoiced. I trust that you are not much fatigued&mdash;pray be seated
      again.' He led me to my chair, and continued: 'I am glad to perceive you
      have made acquaintance with Emily already; I see, in your being thus
      brought together, the foundation of a lasting friendship. You are both
      innocent, and both young. God bless you&mdash;God bless you, and make you
      all that I could wish.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He raised his eyes, and remained for a few moments silent, as if in secret
      prayer. I felt that it was impossible that this man, with feelings so
      quick, so warm, so tender, could be the wretch that public opinion had
      represented him to be. I was more than ever convinced of his innocence.
    </p>
    <p>
      His manner was, or appeared to me, most fascinating; there was a mingled
      kindness and courtesy in it which seemed to speak benevolence itself. It
      was a manner which I felt cold art could never have taught; it owed most
      of its charm to its appearing to emanate directly from the heart; it must
      be a genuine index of the owner's mind. So I thought.
    </p>
    <p>
      My uncle having given me fully to understand that I was most welcome, and
      might command whatever was his own, pressed me to take some refreshment;
      and on my refusing, he observed that previously to bidding me good-night,
      he had one duty further to perform, one in whose observance he was
      convinced I would cheerfully acquiesce.
    </p>
    <p>
      He then proceeded to read a chapter from the Bible; after which he took
      his leave with the same affectionate kindness with which he had greeted
      me, having repeated his desire that I should consider everything in his
      house as altogether at my disposal. It is needless to say that I was much
      pleased with my uncle&mdash;it was impossible to avoid being so; and I
      could not help saying to myself, if such a man as this is not safe from
      the assaults of slander, who is? I felt much happier than I had done since
      my father's death, and enjoyed that night the first refreshing sleep which
      had visited me since that event.
    </p>
    <p>
      My curiosity respecting my male cousin did not long remain unsatisfied&mdash;he
      appeared the next day at dinner. His manners, though not so coarse as I
      had expected, were exceedingly disagreeable; there was an assurance and a
      forwardness for which I was not prepared; there was less of the vulgarity
      of manner, and almost more of that of the mind, than I had anticipated. I
      felt quite uncomfortable in his presence; there was just that confidence
      in his look and tone which would read encouragement even in mere
      toleration; and I felt more disgusted and annoyed at the coarse and
      extravagant compliments which he was pleased from time to time to pay me,
      than perhaps the extent of the atrocity might fully have warranted. It
      was, however, one consolation that he did not often appear, being much
      engrossed by pursuits about which I neither knew nor cared anything; but
      when he did appear, his attentions, either with a view to his amusement or
      to some more serious advantage, were so obviously and perseveringly
      directed to me, that young and inexperienced as I was, even <i>I</i> could
      not be ignorant of his preference. I felt more provoked by this odious
      persecution than I can express, and discouraged him with so much vigour,
      that I employed even rudeness to convince him that his assiduities were
      unwelcome; but all in vain.
    </p>
    <p>
      This had gone on for nearly a twelve-month, to my infinite annoyance, when
      one day as I was sitting at some needle-work with my companion Emily, as
      was my habit, in the parlour, the door opened, and my cousin Edward
      entered the room. There was something, I thought, odd in his manner&mdash;a
      kind of struggle between shame and impudence&mdash;a kind of flurry and
      ambiguity which made him appear, if possible, more than ordinarily
      disagreeable.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Your servant, ladies,' he said, seating himself at the same time; 'sorry
      to spoil your tete-a-tete, but never mind, I'll only take Emily's place
      for a minute or two; and then we part for a while, fair cousin. Emily, my
      father wants you in the corner turret. No shilly-shally; he's in a hurry.'
      She hesitated. 'Be off&mdash;tramp, march!' he exclaimed, in a tone which
      the poor girl dared not disobey.
    </p>
    <p>
      She left the room, and Edward followed her to the door. He stood there for
      a minute or two, as if reflecting what he should say, perhaps satisfying
      himself that no one was within hearing in the hall.
    </p>
    <p>
      At length he turned about, having closed the door, as if carelessly, with
      his foot; and advancing slowly, as if in deep thought, he took his seat at
      the side of the table opposite to mine.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a brief interval of silence, after which he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'I imagine that you have a shrewd suspicion of the object of my early
      visit; but I suppose I must go into particulars. Must I?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I have no conception,' I replied, 'what your object may be.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, well,' said he, becoming more at his ease as he proceeded, 'it may
      be told in a few words. You know that it is totally impossible&mdash;quite
      out of the question&mdash;that an offhand young fellow like me, and a
      good-looking girl like yourself, could meet continually, as you and I have
      done, without an attachment&mdash;a liking growing up on one side or
      other; in short, I think I have let you know as plain as if I spoke it,
      that I have been in love with you almost from the first time I saw you.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He paused; but I was too much horrified to speak. He interpreted my
      silence favourably.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I can tell you,' he continued, 'I'm reckoned rather hard to please, and
      very hard to HIT. I can't say when I was taken with a girl before; so you
      see fortune reserved me&mdash;&mdash;'
    </p>
    <p>
      Here the odious wretch wound his arm round my waist. The action at once
      restored me to utterance, and with the most indignant vehemence I released
      myself from his hold, and at the same time said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'I have not been insensible, sir, of your most disagreeable attentions&mdash;they
      have long been a source of much annoyance to me; and you must be aware
      that I have marked my disapprobation&mdash;my disgust&mdash;as
      unequivocally as I possibly could, without actual indelicacy.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I paused, almost out of breath from the rapidity with which I had spoken;
      and without giving him time to renew the conversation, I hastily quitted
      the room, leaving him in a paroxysm of rage and mortification. As I
      ascended the stairs, I heard him open the parlour-door with violence, and
      take two or three rapid strides in the direction in which I was moving. I
      was now much frightened, and ran the whole way until I reached my room;
      and having locked the door, I listened breathlessly, but heard no sound.
      This relieved me for the present; but so much had I been overcome by the
      agitation and annoyance attendant upon the scene which I had just gone
      through, that when my cousin Emily knocked at my door, I was weeping in
      strong hysterics.
    </p>
    <p>
      You will readily conceive my distress, when you reflect upon my strong
      dislike to my cousin Edward, combined with my youth and extreme
      inexperience. Any proposal of such a nature must have agitated me; but
      that it should have come from the man whom of all others I most loathed
      and abhorred, and to whom I had, as clearly as manner could do it,
      expressed the state of my feelings, was almost too overwhelming to be
      borne. It was a calamity, too, in which I could not claim the sympathy of
      my cousin Emily, which had always been extended to me in my minor
      grievances. Still I hoped that it might not be unattended with good; for I
      thought that one inevitable and most welcome consequence would result from
      this painful eclaircissment, in the discontinuance of my cousin's odious
      persecution.
    </p>
    <p>
      When I arose next morning, it was with the fervent hope that I might never
      again behold the face, or even hear the name, of my cousin Edward; but
      such a consummation, though devoutly to be wished, was hardly likely to
      occur. The painful impressions of yesterday were too vivid to be at once
      erased; and I could not help feeling some dim foreboding of coming
      annoyance and evil.
    </p>
    <p>
      To expect on my cousin's part anything like delicacy or consideration for
      me, was out of the question. I saw that he had set his heart upon my
      property, and that he was not likely easily to forego such an acquisition&mdash;possessing
      what might have been considered opportunities and facilities almost to
      compel my compliance.
    </p>
    <p>
      I now keenly felt the unreasonableness of my father's conduct in placing
      me to reside with a family of all whose members, with one exception, he
      was wholly ignorant, and I bitterly felt the helplessness of my situation.
      I determined, however, in case of my cousin's persevering in his
      addresses, to lay all the particulars before my uncle, although he had
      never in kindness or intimacy gone a step beyond our first interview, and
      to throw myself upon his hospitality and his sense of honour for
      protection against a repetition of such scenes.
    </p>
    <p>
      My cousin's conduct may appear to have been an inadequate cause for such
      serious uneasiness; but my alarm was caused neither by his acts nor words,
      but entirely by his manner, which was strange and even intimidating to
      excess. At the beginning of the yesterday's interview there was a sort of
      bullying swagger in his air, which towards the end gave place to the
      brutal vehemence of an undisguised ruffian&mdash;a transition which had
      tempted me into a belief that he might seek even forcibly to extort from
      me a consent to his wishes, or by means still more horrible, of which I
      scarcely dared to trust myself to think, to possess himself of my
      property.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was early next day summoned to attend my uncle in his private room,
      which lay in a corner turret of the old building; and thither I
      accordingly went, wondering all the way what this unusual measure might
      prelude. When I entered the room, he did not rise in his usual courteous
      way to greet me, but simply pointed to a chair opposite to his own. This
      boded nothing agreeable. I sat down, however, silently waiting until he
      should open the conversation.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Lady Margaret,' at length he said, in a tone of greater sternness than I
      thought him capable of using, 'I have hitherto spoken to you as a friend,
      but I have not forgotten that I am also your guardian, and that my
      authority as such gives me a right to control your conduct. I shall put a
      question to you, and I expect and will demand a plain, direct answer. Have
      I rightly been informed that you have contemptuously rejected the suit and
      hand of my son Edward?'
    </p>
    <p>
      I stammered forth with a good deal of trepidation:
    </p>
    <p>
      'I believe&mdash;that is, I have, sir, rejected my cousin's proposals; and
      my coldness and discouragement might have convinced him that I had
      determined to do so.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Madam,' replied he, with suppressed, but, as it appeared to me, intense
      anger, 'I have lived long enough to know that COLDNESS and discouragement,
      and such terms, form the common cant of a worthless coquette. You know to
      the full, as well as I, that COLDNESS AND DISCOURAGEMENT may be so
      exhibited as to convince their object that he is neither distasteful or
      indifferent to the person who wears this manner. You know, too, none
      better, that an affected neglect, when skilfully managed, is amongst the
      most formidable of the engines which artful beauty can employ. I tell you,
      madam, that having, without one word spoken in discouragement, permitted
      my son's most marked attentions for a twelvemonth or more, you have no
      right to dismiss him with no further explanation than demurely telling him
      that you had always looked coldly upon him; and neither your wealth nor
      your LADYSHIP' (there was an emphasis of scorn on the word, which would
      have become Sir Giles Overreach himself) 'can warrant you in treating with
      contempt the affectionate regard of an honest heart.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I was too much shocked at this undisguised attempt to bully me into an
      acquiescence in the interested and unprincipled plan for their own
      aggrandisement, which I now perceived my uncle and his son to have
      deliberately entered into, at once to find strength or collectedness to
      frame an answer to what he had said. At length I replied, with some
      firmness:
    </p>
    <p>
      'In all that you have just now said, sir, you have grossly misstated my
      conduct and motives. Your information must have been most incorrect as far
      as it regards my conduct towards my cousin; my manner towards him could
      have conveyed nothing but dislike; and if anything could have added to the
      strong aversion which I have long felt towards him, it would be his
      attempting thus to trick and frighten me into a marriage which he knows to
      be revolting to me, and which is sought by him only as a means for
      securing to himself whatever property is mine.'
    </p>
    <p>
      As I said this, I fixed my eyes upon those of my uncle, but he was too old
      in the world's ways to falter beneath the gaze of more searching eyes than
      mine; he simply said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Are you acquainted with the provisions of your father's will?'
    </p>
    <p>
      I answered in the affirmative; and he continued:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Then you must be aware that if my son Edward were&mdash;which God forbid&mdash;the
      unprincipled, reckless man you pretend to think him'&mdash;(here he spoke
      very slowly, as if he intended that every word which escaped him should be
      registered in my memory, while at the same time the expression of his
      countenance underwent a gradual but horrible change, and the eyes which he
      fixed upon me became so darkly vivid, that I almost lost sight of
      everything else)&mdash;'if he were what you have described him, think you,
      girl, he could find no briefer means than wedding contracts to gain his
      ends? 'twas but to gripe your slender neck until the breath had stopped,
      and lands, and lakes, and all were his.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I stood staring at him for many minutes after he had ceased to speak,
      fascinated by the terrible serpent-like gaze, until he continued with a
      welcome change of countenance:
    </p>
    <p>
      'I will not speak again to you upon this&mdash;topic until one month has
      passed. You shall have time to consider the relative advantages of the two
      courses which are open to you. I should be sorry to hurry you to a
      decision. I am satisfied with having stated my feelings upon the subject,
      and pointed out to you the path of duty. Remember this day month&mdash;not
      one word sooner.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He then rose, and I left the room, much agitated and exhausted.
    </p>
    <p>
      This interview, all the circumstances attending it, but most particularly
      the formidable expression of my uncle's countenance while he talked,
      though hypothetically, of murder, combined to arouse all my worst
      suspicions of him. I dreaded to look upon the face that had so recently
      worn the appalling livery of guilt and malignity. I regarded it with the
      mingled fear and loathing with which one looks upon an object which has
      tortured them in a nightmare.
    </p>
    <p>
      In a few days after the interview, the particulars of which I have just
      related, I found a note upon my toilet-table, and on opening it I read as
      follows:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     'MY DEAR LADY MARGARET,
          'You will be perhaps surprised to
see a strange face in your room to-day. I have dismissed your Irish
maid, and secured a French one to wait upon you&mdash;a step rendered
necessary by my proposing shortly to visit the Continent, with all my
family.
</pre>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
'Your faithful guardian,

'ARTHUR T&mdash;&mdash;N.'
</pre>
    <p>
      On inquiry, I found that my faithful attendant was actually gone, and far
      on her way to the town of Galway; and in her stead there appeared a tall,
      raw-boned, ill-looking, elderly Frenchwoman, whose sullen and presuming
      manners seemed to imply that her vocation had never before been that of a
      lady's-maid. I could not help regarding her as a creature of my uncle's,
      and therefore to be dreaded, even had she been in no other way suspicious.
    </p>
    <p>
      Days and weeks passed away without any, even a momentary doubt upon my
      part, as to the course to be pursued by me. The allotted period had at
      length elapsed; the day arrived on which I was to communicate my decision
      to my uncle. Although my resolution had never for a moment wavered, I
      could not shake of the dread of the approaching colloquy; and my heart
      sunk within me as I heard the expected summons.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had not seen my cousin Edward since the occurrence of the grand
      eclaircissment; he must have studiously avoided me&mdash;I suppose from
      policy, it could not have been from delicacy. I was prepared for a
      terrific burst of fury from my uncle, as soon as I should make known my
      determination; and I not unreasonably feared that some act of violence or
      of intimidation would next be resorted to.
    </p>
    <p>
      Filled with these dreary forebodings, I fearfully opened the study door,
      and the next minute I stood in my uncle's presence. He received me with a
      politeness which I dreaded, as arguing a favourable anticipation
      respecting the answer which I was to give; and after some slight delay, he
      began by saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      'It will be a relief to both of us, I believe, to bring this conversation
      as soon as possible to an issue. You will excuse me, then, my dear niece,
      for speaking with an abruptness which, under other circumstances, would be
      unpardonable. You have, I am certain, given the subject of our last
      interview fair and serious consideration; and I trust that you are now
      prepared with candour to lay your answer before me. A few words will
      suffice&mdash;we perfectly understand one another.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He paused, and I, though feeling that I stood upon a mine which might in
      an instant explode, nevertheless answered with perfect composure:
    </p>
    <p>
      'I must now, sir, make the same reply which I did upon the last occasion,
      and I reiterate the declaration which I then made, that I never can nor
      will, while life and reason remain, consent to a union with my cousin
      Edward.'
    </p>
    <p>
      This announcement wrought no apparent change in Sir Arthur, except that he
      became deadly, almost lividly pale. He seemed lost in dark thought for a
      minute, and then with a slight effort said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'You have answered me honestly and directly; and you say your resolution
      is unchangeable. Well, would it had been otherwise&mdash;would it had been
      otherwise&mdash;but be it as it is&mdash;I am satisfied.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He gave me his hand&mdash;it was cold and damp as death; under an assumed
      calmness, it was evident that he was fearfully agitated. He continued to
      hold my hand with an almost painful pressure, while, as if unconsciously,
      seeming to forget my presence, he muttered:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Strange, strange, strange, indeed! fatuity, helpless fatuity!' there was
      here a long pause. 'Madness INDEED to strain a cable that is rotten to the
      very heart&mdash;it must break&mdash;and then&mdash;all goes.'
    </p>
    <p>
      There was again a pause of some minutes, after which, suddenly changing
      his voice and manner to one of wakeful alacrity, he exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Margaret, my son Edward shall plague you no more. He leaves this country
      on to-morrow for France&mdash;he shall speak no more upon this subject&mdash;never,
      never more&mdash;whatever events depended upon your answer must now take
      their own course; but, as for this fruitless proposal, it has been tried
      enough; it can be repeated no more.'
    </p>
    <p>
      At these words he coldly suffered my hand to drop, as if to express his
      total abandonment of all his projected schemes of alliance; and certainly
      the action, with the accompanying words, produced upon my mind a more
      solemn and depressing effect than I believed possible to have been caused
      by the course which I had determined to pursue; it struck upon my heart
      with an awe and heaviness which WILL accompany the accomplishment of an
      important and irrevocable act, even though no doubt or scruple remains to
      make it possible that the agent should wish it undone.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well,' said my uncle, after a little time, 'we now cease to speak upon
      this topic, never to resume it again. Remember you shall have no farther
      uneasiness from Edward; he leaves Ireland for France on to-morrow; this
      will be a relief to you. May I depend upon your HONOUR that no word
      touching the subject of this interview shall ever escape you?'
    </p>
    <p>
      I gave him the desired assurance; he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'It is well&mdash;I am satisfied&mdash;we have nothing more, I believe, to
      say upon either side, and my presence must be a restraint upon you, I
      shall therefore bid you farewell.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I then left the apartment, scarcely knowing what to think of the strange
      interview which had just taken place.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the next day my uncle took occasion to tell me that Edward had actually
      sailed, if his intention had not been interfered with by adverse
      circumstances; and two days subsequently he actually produced a letter
      from his son, written, as it said, ON BOARD, and despatched while the ship
      was getting under weigh. This was a great satisfaction to me, and as being
      likely to prove so, it was no doubt communicated to me by Sir Arthur.
    </p>
    <p>
      During all this trying period, I had found infinite consolation in the
      society and sympathy of my dear cousin Emily. I never in after-life formed
      a friendship so close, so fervent, and upon which, in all its progress, I
      could look back with feelings of such unalloyed pleasure, upon whose
      termination I must ever dwell with so deep, yet so unembittered regret. In
      cheerful converse with her I soon recovered my spirits considerably, and
      passed my time agreeably enough, although still in the strictest
      seclusion.
    </p>
    <p>
      Matters went on sufficiently smooth, although I could not help sometimes
      feeling a momentary, but horrible uncertainty respecting my uncle's
      character; which was not altogether unwarranted by the circumstances of
      the two trying interviews whose particulars I have just detailed. The
      unpleasant impression which these conferences were calculated to leave
      upon my mind, was fast wearing away, when there occurred a circumstance,
      slight indeed in itself, but calculated irresistibly to awaken all my
      worst suspicions, and to overwhelm me again with anxiety and terror.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had one day left the house with my cousin Emily, in order to take a
      ramble of considerable length, for the purpose of sketching some favourite
      views, and we had walked about half a mile when I perceived that we had
      forgotten our drawing materials, the absence of which would have defeated
      the object of our walk. Laughing at our own thoughtlessness, we returned
      to the house, and leaving Emily without, I ran upstairs to procure the
      drawing-books and pencils, which lay in my bedroom.
    </p>
    <p>
      As I ran up the stairs I was met by the tall, ill-looking Frenchwoman,
      evidently a good deal flurried.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Que veut, madame?' said she, with a more decided effort to be polite than
      I had ever known her make before.
    </p>
    <p>
      'No, no&mdash;no matter,' said I, hastily running by her in the direction
      of my room.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Madame,' cried she, in a high key, 'restez ici, s'il vous plait; votre
      chambre n'est pas faite&mdash;your room is not ready for your reception
      yet.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I continued to move on without heeding her. She was some way behind me,
      and feeling that she could not otherwise prevent my entrance, for I was
      now upon the very lobby, she made a desperate attempt to seize hold of my
      person: she succeeded in grasping the end of my shawl, which she drew from
      my shoulders; but slipping at the same time upon the polished oak floor,
      she fell at full length upon the boards.
    </p>
    <p>
      A little frightened as well as angry at the rudeness of this strange
      woman, I hastily pushed open the door of my room, at which I now stood, in
      order to escape from her; but great was my amazement on entering to find
      the apartment preoccupied.
    </p>
    <p>
      The window was open, and beside it stood two male figures; they appeared
      to be examining the fastenings of the casement, and their backs were
      turned towards the door. One of them was my uncle; they both turned on my
      entrance, as if startled. The stranger was booted and cloaked, and wore a
      heavy broad-leafed hat over his brows. He turned but for a moment, and
      averted his face; but I had seen enough to convince me that he was no
      other than my cousin Edward. My uncle had some iron instrument in his
      hand, which he hastily concealed behind his back; and coming towards me,
      said something as if in an explanatory tone; but I was too much shocked
      and confounded to understand what it might be. He said something about
      'REPAIRS&mdash;window&mdash;frames&mdash;cold, and safety.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I did not wait, however, to ask or to receive explanations, but hastily
      left the room. As I went down the stairs I thought I heard the voice of
      the Frenchwoman in all the shrill volubility of excuse, which was met,
      however, by suppressed but vehement imprecations, or what seemed to me to
      be such, in which the voice of my cousin Edward distinctly mingled.
    </p>
    <p>
      I joined my cousin Emily quite out of breath. I need not say that my head
      was too full of other things to think much of drawing for that day. I
      imparted to her frankly the cause of my alarms, but at the same time as
      gently as I could; and with tears she promised vigilance, and devotion,
      and love. I never had reason for a moment to repent the unreserved
      confidence which I then reposed in her. She was no less surprised than I
      at the unexpected appearance of Edward, whose departure for France neither
      of us had for a moment doubted, but which was now proved by his actual
      presence to be nothing more than an imposture, practised, I feared, for no
      good end.
    </p>
    <p>
      The situation in which I had found my uncle had removed completely all my
      doubts as to his designs. I magnified suspicions into certainties, and
      dreaded night after night that I should be murdered in my bed. The
      nervousness produced by sleepless nights and days of anxious fears
      increased the horrors of my situation to such a degree, that I at length
      wrote a letter to a Mr. Jefferies, an old and faithful friend of my
      father's, and perfectly acquainted with all his affairs, praying him, for
      God's sake, to relieve me from my present terrible situation, and
      communicating without reserve the nature and grounds of my suspicions.
    </p>
    <p>
      This letter I kept sealed and directed for two or three days always about
      my person, for discovery would have been ruinous, in expectation of an
      opportunity which might be safely trusted, whereby to have it placed in
      the post-office. As neither Emily nor I were permitted to pass beyond the
      precincts of the demesne itself, which was surrounded by high walls formed
      of dry stone, the difficulty of procuring such an opportunity was greatly
      enhanced.
    </p>
    <p>
      At this time Emily had a short conversation with her father, which she
      reported to me instantly.
    </p>
    <p>
      After some indifferent matter, he had asked her whether she and I were
      upon good terms, and whether I was unreserved in my disposition. She
      answered in the affirmative; and he then inquired whether I had been much
      surprised to find him in my chamber on the other day. She answered that I
      had been both surprised and amused.
    </p>
    <p>
      'And what did she think of George Wilson's appearance?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Who?' inquired she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh, the architect,' he answered, 'who is to contract for the repairs of
      the house; he is accounted a handsome fellow.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'She could not see his face,' said Emily, 'and she was in such a hurry to
      escape that she scarcely noticed him.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Sir Arthur appeared satisfied, and the conversation ended.
    </p>
    <p>
      This slight conversation, repeated accurately to me by Emily, had the
      effect of confirming, if indeed anything was required to do so, all that I
      had before believed as to Edward's actual presence; and I naturally
      became, if possible, more anxious than ever to despatch the letter to Mr.
      Jefferies. An opportunity at length occurred.
    </p>
    <p>
      As Emily and I were walking one day near the gate of the demesne, a lad
      from the village happened to be passing down the avenue from the house;
      the spot was secluded, and as this person was not connected by service
      with those whose observation I dreaded, I committed the letter to his
      keeping, with strict injunctions that he should put it without delay into
      the receiver of the town post-office; at the same time I added a suitable
      gratuity, and the man having made many protestations of punctuality, was
      soon out of sight.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was hardly gone when I began to doubt my discretion in having trusted
      this person; but I had no better or safer means of despatching the letter,
      and I was not warranted in suspecting him of such wanton dishonesty as an
      inclination to tamper with it; but I could not be quite satisfied of its
      safety until I had received an answer, which could not arrive for a few
      days. Before I did, however, an event occurred which a little surprised
      me.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was sitting in my bedroom early in the day, reading by myself, when I
      heard a knock at the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Come in,' said I; and my uncle entered the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Will you excuse me?' said he. 'I sought you in the parlour, and thence I
      have come here. I desired to say a word with you. I trust that you have
      hitherto found my conduct to you such as that of a guardian towards his
      ward should be.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I dared not withhold my consent.
    </p>
    <p>
      'And,' he continued, 'I trust that you have not found me harsh or unjust,
      and that you have perceived, my dear niece, that I have sought to make
      this poor place as agreeable to you as may be.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I assented again; and he put his hand in his pocket, whence he drew a
      folded paper, and dashing it upon the table with startling emphasis, he
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Did you write that letter?'
    </p>
    <p>
      The sudden and tearful alteration of his voice, manner, and face, but,
      more than all, the unexpected production of my letter to Mr. Jefferies,
      which I at once recognised, so confounded and terrified me, that I felt
      almost choking.
    </p>
    <p>
      I could not utter a word.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Did you write that letter?' he repeated with slow and intense emphasis.'
      You did, liar and hypocrite! You dared to write this foul and infamous
      libel; but it shall be your last. Men will universally believe you mad, if
      I choose to call for an inquiry. I can make you appear so. The suspicions
      expressed in this letter are the hallucinations and alarms of moping
      lunacy. I have defeated your first attempt, madam; and by the holy God, if
      ever you make another, chains, straw, darkness, and the keeper's whip
      shall be your lasting portion!'
    </p>
    <p>
      With these astounding words he left the room, leaving me almost fainting.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was now almost reduced to despair; my last cast had failed; I had no
      course left but that of eloping secretly from the castle, and placing
      myself under the protection of the nearest magistrate. I felt if this were
      not done, and speedily, that I should be MURDERED.
    </p>
    <p>
      No one, from mere description, can have an idea of the unmitigated horror
      of my situation&mdash;a helpless, weak, inexperienced girl, placed under
      the power and wholly at the mercy of evil men, and feeling that she had it
      not in her power to escape for a moment from the malignant influences
      under which she was probably fated to fall; and with a consciousness that
      if violence, if murder were designed, her dying shriek would be lost in
      void space; no human being would be near to aid her, no human
      interposition could deliver her.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had seen Edward but once during his visit, and as I did not meet with
      him again, I began to think that he must have taken his departure&mdash;a
      conviction which was to a certain degree satisfactory, as I regarded his
      absence as indicating the removal of immediate danger.
    </p>
    <p>
      Emily also arrived circuitously at the same conclusion, and not without
      good grounds, for she managed indirectly to learn that Edward's black
      horse had actually been for a day and part of a night in the castle
      stables, just at the time of her brother's supposed visit. The horse had
      gone, and, as she argued, the rider must have departed with it.
    </p>
    <p>
      This point being so far settled, I felt a little less uncomfortable: when
      being one day alone in my bedroom, I happened to look out from the window,
      and, to my unutterable horror, I beheld, peering through an opposite
      casement, my cousin Edward's face. Had I seen the evil one himself in
      bodily shape, I could not have experienced a more sickening revulsion.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was too much appalled to move at once from the window, but I did so soon
      enough to avoid his eye. He was looking fixedly into the narrow quadrangle
      upon which the window opened. I shrank back unperceived, to pass the rest
      of the day in terror and despair. I went to my room early that night, but
      I was too miserable to sleep.
    </p>
    <p>
      At about twelve o'clock, feeling very nervous, I determined to call my
      cousin Emily, who slept, you will remember, in the next room, which
      communicated with mine by a second door. By this private entrance I found
      my way into her chamber, and without difficulty persuaded her to return to
      my room and sleep with me. We accordingly lay down together, she
      undressed, and I with my clothes on, for I was every moment walking up and
      down the room, and felt too nervous and miserable to think of rest or
      comfort.
    </p>
    <p>
      Emily was soon fast asleep, and I lay awake, fervently longing for the
      first pale gleam of morning, reckoning every stroke of the old clock with
      an impatience which made every hour appear like six.
    </p>
    <p>
      It must have been about one o'clock when I thought I heard a slight noise
      at the partition-door between Emily's room and mine, as if caused by
      somebody's turning the key in the lock. I held my breath, and the same
      sound was repeated at the second door of my room&mdash;that which opened
      upon the lobby&mdash;the sound was here distinctly caused by the
      revolution of the bolt in the lock, and it was followed by a slight
      pressure upon the door itself, as if to ascertain the security of the
      lock.
    </p>
    <p>
      The person, whoever it might be, was probably satisfied, for I heard the
      old boards of the lobby creak and strain, as if under the weight of
      somebody moving cautiously over them. My sense of hearing became
      unnaturally, almost painfully acute. I suppose the imagination added
      distinctness to sounds vague in themselves. I thought that I could
      actually hear the breathing of the person who was slowly returning down
      the lobby. At the head of the staircase there appeared to occur a pause;
      and I could distinctly hear two or three sentences hastily whispered; the
      steps then descended the stairs with apparently less caution. I now
      ventured to walk quickly and lightly to the lobby-door, and attempted to
      open it; it was indeed fast locked upon the outside, as was also the
      other.
    </p>
    <p>
      I now felt that the dreadful hour was come; but one desperate expedient
      remained&mdash;it was to awaken Emily, and by our united strength to
      attempt to force the partition-door, which was slighter than the other,
      and through this to pass to the lower part of the house, whence it might
      be possible to escape to the grounds, and forth to the village.
    </p>
    <p>
      I returned to the bedside and shook Emily, but in vain. Nothing that I
      could do availed to produce from her more than a few incoherent words&mdash;it
      was a death-like sleep. She had certainly drank of some narcotic, as had I
      probably also, spite of all the caution with which I had examined
      everything presented to us to eat or drink.
    </p>
    <p>
      I now attempted, with as little noise as possible, to force first one
      door, then the other&mdash;but all in vain. I believe no strength could
      have effected my object, for both doors opened inwards. I therefore
      collected whatever movables I could carry thither, and piled them against
      the doors, so as to assist me in whatever attempts I should make to resist
      the entrance of those without. I then returned to the bed and endeavoured
      again, but fruitlessly, to awaken my cousin. It was not sleep, it was
      torpor, lethargy, death. I knelt down and prayed with an agony of
      earnestness; and then seating myself upon the bed, I awaited my fate with
      a kind of terrible tranquillity.
    </p>
    <p>
      I heard a faint clanking sound from the narrow court which I have already
      mentioned, as if caused by the scraping of some iron instrument against
      stones or rubbish. I at first determined not to disturb the calmness which
      I now felt, by uselessly watching the proceedings of those who sought my
      life; but as the sounds continued, the horrible curiosity which I felt
      overcame every other emotion, and I determined, at all hazards, to gratify
      it. I therefore crawled upon my knees to the window, so as to let the
      smallest portion of my head appear above the sill.
    </p>
    <p>
      The moon was shining with an uncertain radiance upon the antique grey
      buildings, and obliquely upon the narrow court beneath, one side of which
      was therefore clearly illuminated, while the other was lost in obscurity,
      the sharp outlines of the old gables, with their nodding clusters of ivy,
      being at first alone visible.
    </p>
    <p>
      Whoever or whatever occasioned the noise which had excited my curiosity,
      was concealed under the shadow of the dark side of the quadrangle. I
      placed my hand over my eyes to shade them from the moonlight, which was so
      bright as to be almost dazzling, and, peering into the darkness, I first
      dimly, but afterwards gradually, almost with full distinctness, beheld the
      form of a man engaged in digging what appeared to be a rude hole close
      under the wall. Some implements, probably a shovel and pickaxe, lay beside
      him, and to these he every now and then applied himself as the nature of
      the ground required. He pursued his task rapidly, and with as little noise
      as possible.
    </p>
    <p>
      'So,' thought I, as, shovelful after shovelful, the dislodged rubbish
      mounted into a heap, 'they are digging the grave in which, before two
      hours pass, I must lie, a cold, mangled corpse. I am THEIRS&mdash;I cannot
      escape.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I felt as if my reason was leaving me. I started to my feet, and in mere
      despair I applied myself again to each of the two doors alternately. I
      strained every nerve and sinew, but I might as well have attempted, with
      my single strength, to force the building itself from its foundation. I
      threw myself madly upon the ground, and clasped my hands over my eyes as
      if to shut out the horrible images which crowded upon me.
    </p>
    <p>
      The paroxysm passed away. I prayed once more, with the bitter, agonised
      fervour of one who feels that the hour of death is present and inevitable.
      When I arose, I went once more to the window and looked out, just in time
      to see a shadowy figure glide stealthily along the wall. The task was
      finished. The catastrophe of the tragedy must soon be accomplished.
    </p>
    <p>
      I determined now to defend my life to the last; and that I might be able
      to do so with some effect, I searched the room for something which might
      serve as a weapon; but either through accident, or from an anticipation of
      such a possibility, everything which might have been made available for
      such a purpose had been carefully removed. I must then die tamely and
      without an effort to defend myself.
    </p>
    <p>
      A thought suddenly struck me&mdash;might it not be possible to escape
      through the door, which the assassin must open in order to enter the room?
      I resolved to make the attempt. I felt assured that the door through which
      ingress to the room would be effected, was that which opened upon the
      lobby. It was the more direct way, besides being, for obvious reasons,
      less liable to interruption than the other. I resolved, then, to place
      myself behind a projection of the wall, whose shadow would serve fully to
      conceal me, and when the door should be opened, and before they should
      have discovered the identity of the occupant of the bed, to creep
      noiselessly from the room, and then to trust to Providence for escape.
    </p>
    <p>
      In order to facilitate this scheme, I removed all the lumber which I had
      heaped against the door; and I had nearly completed my arrangements, when
      I perceived the room suddenly darkened by the close approach of some
      shadowy object to the window. On turning my eyes in that direction, I
      observed at the top of the casement, as if suspended from above, first the
      feet, then the legs, then the body, and at length the whole figure of a
      man present himself. It was Edward T&mdash;&mdash;n.
    </p>
    <p>
      He appeared to be guiding his descent so as to bring his feet upon the
      centre of the stone block which occupied the lower part of the window;
      and, having secured his footing upon this, he kneeled down and began to
      gaze into the room. As the moon was gleaming into the chamber, and the
      bed-curtains were drawn, he was able to distinguish the bed itself and its
      contents. He appeared satisfied with his scrutiny, for he looked up and
      made a sign with his hand, upon which the rope by which his descent had
      been effected was slackened from above, and he proceeded to disengage it
      from his waist; this accomplished, he applied his hands to the
      window-frame, which must have been ingeniously contrived for the purpose,
      for, with apparently no resistance, the whole frame, containing casement
      and all, slipped from its position in the wall, and was by him lowered
      into the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      The cold night wind waved the bed-curtains, and he paused for a moment&mdash;all
      was still again&mdash;and he stepped in upon the floor of the room. He
      held in his hand what appeared to be a steel instrument, shaped something
      like a hammer, but larger and sharper at the extremities. This he held
      rather behind him, while, with three long, tip-toe strides, he brought
      himself to the bedside.
    </p>
    <p>
      I felt that the discovery must now be made, and held my breath in
      momentary expectation of the execration in which he would vent his
      surprise and disappointment. I closed my eyes&mdash;there was a pause, but
      it was a short one. I heard two dull blows, given in rapid succession: a
      quivering sigh, and the long-drawn, heavy breathing of the sleeper was for
      ever suspended. I unclosed my eyes, and saw the murderer fling the quilt
      across the head of his victim: he then, with the instrument of death still
      in his hand, proceeded to the lobby-door, upon which he tapped sharply
      twice or thrice. A quick step was then heard approaching, and a voice
      whispered something from without. Edward answered, with a kind of chuckle,
      'Her ladyship is past complaining; unlock the door, in the devil's name,
      unless you're afraid to come in, and help me to lift the body out of the
      window.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The key was turned in the lock&mdash;the door opened&mdash;and my uncle
      entered the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      I have told you already that I had placed myself under the shade of a
      projection of the wall, close to the door. I had instinctively shrunk
      down, cowering towards the ground on the entrance of Edward through the
      window. When my uncle entered the room he and his son both stood so very
      close to me that his hand was every moment upon the point of touching my
      face. I held my breath, and remained motionless as death.
    </p>
    <p>
      'You had no interruption from the next room?' said my uncle.
    </p>
    <p>
      'No,' was the brief reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Secure the jewels, Ned; the French harpy must not lay her claws upon
      them. You're a steady hand, by G&mdash;&mdash;! not much blood&mdash;eh?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Not twenty drops,' replied his son, 'and those on the quilt.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I'm glad it's over,' whispered my uncle again. 'We must lift the&mdash;the
      THING through the window, and lay the rubbish over it.'
    </p>
    <p>
      They then turned to the bedside, and, winding the bed-clothes round the
      body, carried it between them slowly to the window, and, exchanging a few
      brief words with some one below, they shoved it over the window-sill, and
      I heard it fall heavily on the ground underneath.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I'll take the jewels,' said my uncle; 'there are two caskets in the lower
      drawer.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He proceeded, with an accuracy which, had I been more at ease, would have
      furnished me with matter of astonishment, to lay his hand upon the very
      spot where my jewels lay; and having possessed himself of them, he called
      to his son:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Is the rope made fast above?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I'm not a fool&mdash;to be sure it is,' replied he.
    </p>
    <p>
      They then lowered themselves from the window. I now rose lightly and
      cautiously, scarcely daring to breathe, from my place of concealment, and
      was creeping towards the door, when I heard my cousin's voice, in a sharp
      whisper, exclaim: 'Scramble up again! G&mdash;d d&mdash;&mdash;n you,
      you've forgot to lock the room-door!' and I perceived, by the straining of
      the rope which hung from above, that the mandate was instantly obeyed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Not a second was to be lost. I passed through the door, which was only
      closed, and moved as rapidly as I could, consistently with stillness,
      along the lobby. Before I had gone many yards, I heard the door through
      which I had just passed double-locked on the inside. I glided down the
      stairs in terror, lest, at every corner, I should meet the murderer or one
      of his accomplices.
    </p>
    <p>
      I reached the hall, and listened for a moment to ascertain whether all was
      silent around; no sound was audible. The parlour windows opened on the
      park, and through one of them I might, I thought, easily effect my escape.
      Accordingly, I hastily entered; but, to my consternation, a candle was
      burning in the room, and by its light I saw a figure seated at the
      dinner-table, upon which lay glasses, bottles, and the other
      accompaniments of a drinking-party. Two or three chairs were placed about
      the table irregularly, as if hastily abandoned by their occupants.
    </p>
    <p>
      A single glance satisfied me that the figure was that of my French
      attendant. She was fast asleep, having probably drank deeply. There was
      something malignant and ghastly in the calmness of this bad woman's
      features, dimly illuminated as they were by the flickering blaze of the
      candle. A knife lay upon the table, and the terrible thought struck me&mdash;'Should
      I kill this sleeping accomplice in the guilt of the murderer, and thus
      secure my retreat?'
    </p>
    <p>
      Nothing could be easier&mdash;it was but to draw the blade across her
      throat&mdash;the work of a second. An instant's pause, however, corrected
      me. 'No,' thought I, 'the God who has conducted me thus far through the
      valley of the shadow of death, will not abandon me now. I will fall into
      their hands, or I will escape hence, but it shall be free from the stain
      of blood. His will be done.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I felt a confidence arising from this reflection, an assurance of
      protection which I cannot describe. There was no other means of escape, so
      I advanced, with a firm step and collected mind, to the window. I
      noiselessly withdrew the bars and unclosed the shutters&mdash;I pushed
      open the casement, and, without waiting to look behind me, I ran with my
      utmost speed, scarcely feeling the ground under me, down the avenue,
      taking care to keep upon the grass which bordered it.
    </p>
    <p>
      I did not for a moment slack my speed, and I had now gained the centre
      point between the park-gate and the mansion-house. Here the avenue made a
      wider circuit, and in order to avoid delay, I directed my way across the
      smooth sward round which the pathway wound, intending, at the opposite
      side of the flat, at a point which I distinguished by a group of old
      birch-trees, to enter again upon the beaten track, which was from thence
      tolerably direct to the gate.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had, with my utmost speed, got about half way across this broad flat,
      when the rapid treading of a horse's hoofs struck upon my ear. My heart
      swelled in my bosom as though I would smother. The clattering of galloping
      hoofs approached&mdash;I was pursued&mdash;they were now upon the sward on
      which I was running&mdash;there was not a bush or a bramble to shelter me&mdash;and,
      as if to render escape altogether desperate, the moon, which had hitherto
      been obscured, at this moment shone forth with a broad clear light, which
      made every object distinctly visible.
    </p>
    <p>
      The sounds were now close behind me. I felt my knees bending under me,
      with the sensation which torments one in dreams. I reeled&mdash;I stumbled&mdash;I
      fell&mdash;and at the same instant the cause of my alarm wheeled past me
      at full gallop. It was one of the young fillies which pastured loose about
      the park, whose frolics had thus all but maddened me with terror. I
      scrambled to my feet, and rushed on with weak but rapid steps, my sportive
      companion still galloping round and round me with many a frisk and fling,
      until, at length, more dead than alive, I reached the avenue-gate and
      crossed the stile, I scarce knew how.
    </p>
    <p>
      I ran through the village, in which all was silent as the grave, until my
      progress was arrested by the hoarse voice of a sentinel, who cried: 'Who
      goes there?' I felt that I was now safe. I turned in the direction of the
      voice, and fell fainting at the soldier's feet. When I came to myself; I
      was sitting in a miserable hovel, surrounded by strange faces, all
      bespeaking curiosity and compassion.
    </p>
    <p>
      Many soldiers were in it also: indeed, as I afterwards found, it was
      employed as a guard-room by a detachment of troops quartered for that
      night in the town. In a few words I informed their officer of the
      circumstances which had occurred, describing also the appearance of the
      persons engaged in the murder; and he, without loss of time, proceeded to
      the mansion-house of Carrickleigh, taking with him a party of his men. But
      the villains had discovered their mistake, and had effected their escape
      before the arrival of the military.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Frenchwoman was, however, arrested in the neighbourhood upon the next
      day. She was tried and condemned upon the ensuing assizes; and previous to
      her execution, confessed that 'SHE HAD A HAND IN MAKING HUGH TISDAL'S
      BED.' She had been a housekeeper in the castle at the time, and a kind of
      chere amie of my uncle's. She was, in reality, able to speak English like
      a native, but had exclusively used the French language, I suppose to
      facilitate her disguise. She died the same hardened wretch which she had
      lived, confessing her crimes only, as she alleged, that her doing so might
      involve Sir Arthur T&mdash;&mdash;n, the great author of her guilt and
      misery, and whom she now regarded with unmitigated detestation.
    </p>
    <p>
      With the particulars of Sir Arthur's and his son's escape, as far as they
      are known, you are acquainted. You are also in possession of their after
      fate&mdash;the terrible, the tremendous retribution which, after long
      delays of many years, finally overtook and crushed them. Wonderful and
      inscrutable are the dealings of God with His creatures.
    </p>
    <p>
      Deep and fervent as must always be my gratitude to heaven for my
      deliverance, effected by a chain of providential occurrences, the failing
      of a single link of which must have ensured my destruction, I was long
      before I could look back upon it with other feelings than those of
      bitterness, almost of agony.
    </p>
    <p>
      The only being that had ever really loved me, my nearest and dearest
      friend, ever ready to sympathise, to counsel, and to assist&mdash;the
      gayest, the gentlest, the warmest heart&mdash;the only creature on earth
      that cared for me&mdash;HER life had been the price of my deliverance; and
      I then uttered the wish, which no event of my long and sorrowful life has
      taught me to recall, that she had been spared, and that, in her stead, <i>I</i>
      were mouldering in the grave, forgotten and at rest.
    </p>
    <h2>
      THE BRIDAL OF CARRIGVARAH.
    </h2>
    <p>
      Being a Sixth Extract from the Legacy of the late Francis Purcell, P. P.
      of Drumcoolagh.
    </p>
    <p>
      In a sequestered district of the county of Limerick, there stood my early
      life, some forty years ago, one of those strong stone buildings, half
      castle, half farm-house, which are not unfrequent in the South of Ireland,
      and whose solid masonry and massive construction seem to prove at once the
      insecurity and the caution of the Cromwellite settlers who erected them.
      At the time of which I speak, this building was tenanted by an elderly
      man, whose starch and puritanic mien and manners might have become the
      morose preaching parliamentarian captain, who had raised the house and
      ruled the household more than a hundred years before; but this man, though
      Protestant by descent as by name, was not so in religion; he was a strict,
      and in outward observances, an exemplary Catholic; his father had returned
      in early youth to the true faith, and died in the bosom of the church.
    </p>
    <p>
      Martin Heathcote was, at the time of which I speak, a widower, but his
      house-keeping was not on that account altogether solitary, for he had a
      daughter, whose age was now sufficiently advanced to warrant her father in
      imposing upon her the grave duties of domestic superintendence.
    </p>
    <p>
      This little establishment was perfectly isolated, and very little intruded
      upon by acts of neighbourhood; for the rank of its occupants was of that
      equivocal kind which precludes all familiar association with those of a
      decidedly inferior rank, while it is not sufficient to entitle its
      possessors to the society of established gentility, among whom the nearest
      residents were the O'Maras of Carrigvarah, whose mansion-house,
      constructed out of the ruins of an old abbey, whose towers and cloisters
      had been levelled by the shot of Cromwell's artillery, stood not half a
      mile lower upon the river banks.
    </p>
    <p>
      Colonel O'Mara, the possessor of the estates, was then in a declining
      state of health, and absent with his lady from the country, leaving at the
      castle, his son young O'Mara, and a kind of humble companion, named Edward
      Dwyer, who, if report belied him not, had done in his early days some
      PECULIAR SERVICES for the Colonel, who had been a gay man&mdash;perhaps
      worse&mdash;but enough of recapitulation.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was in the autumn of the year 17&mdash; that the events which led to
      the catastrophe which I have to detail occurred. I shall run through the
      said recital as briefly as clearness will permit, and leave you to
      moralise, if such be your mood, upon the story of real life, which I even
      now trace at this distant period not without emotion.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was upon a beautiful autumn evening, at that glad period of the season
      when the harvest yields its abundance, that two figures were seen
      sauntering along the banks of the winding river, which I described as
      bounding the farm occupied by Heathcote; they had been, as the rods and
      landing-nets which they listlessly carried went to show, plying the
      gentle, but in this case not altogether solitary craft of the fisherman.
      One of those persons was a tall and singularly handsome young man, whose
      dark hair and complexion might almost have belonged to a Spaniard, as
      might also the proud but melancholy expression which gave to his
      countenance a character which contrasts sadly, but not uninterestingly,
      with extreme youth; his air, as he spoke with his companion, was marked by
      that careless familiarity which denotes a conscious superiority of one
      kind or other, or which may be construed into a species of contempt; his
      comrade afforded to him in every respect a striking contrast. He was
      rather low in stature&mdash;a defect which was enhanced by a broad and
      square-built figure&mdash;his face was sallow, and his features had that
      prominence and sharpness which frequently accompany personal deformity&mdash;a
      remarkably wide mouth, with teeth white as the fangs of a wolf, and a pair
      of quick, dark eyes, whose effect was heightened by the shadow of a heavy
      black brow, gave to his face a power of expression, particularly when
      sarcastic or malignant emotions were to be exhibited, which features
      regularly handsome could scarcely have possessed.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, sir,' said the latter personage, 'I have lived in hall and abbey,
      town and country, here and abroad for forty years and more, and should
      know a thing or two, and as I am a living man, I swear I think the girl
      loves you.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'You are a fool, Ned,' said the younger.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I may be a fool,' replied the first speaker, 'in matters where my own
      advantage is staked, but my eye is keen enough to see through the flimsy
      disguise of a country damsel at a glance; and I tell you, as surely as I
      hold this rod, the girl loves you.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh I this is downright headstrong folly,' replied the young fisherman.
      'Why, Ned, you try to persuade me against my reason, that the event which
      is most to be deprecated has actually occurred. She is, no doubt, a pretty
      girl&mdash;a beautiful girl&mdash;but I have not lost my heart to her; and
      why should I wish her to be in love with me? Tush, man, the days of
      romance are gone, and a young gentleman may talk, and walk, and laugh with
      a pretty country maiden, and never breathe aspirations, or vows, or sighs
      about the matter; unequal matches are much oftener read of than made, and
      the man who could, even in thought, conceive a wish against the honour of
      an unsuspecting, artless girl, is a villain, for whom hanging is too
      good.'
    </p>
    <p>
      This concluding sentence was uttered with an animation and excitement,
      which the mere announcement of an abstract moral sentiment could hardly
      account for.
    </p>
    <p>
      'You are, then, indifferent, honestly and in sober earnest, indifferent to
      the girl?' inquired Dwyer.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Altogether so,' was the reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Then I have a request to make,' continued Dwyer, 'and I may as well urge
      it now as at any other time. I have been for nearly twenty years the
      faithful, and by no means useless, servant of your family; you know that I
      have rendered your father critical and important services&mdash;&mdash;'
      he paused, and added hastily: 'you are not in the mood&mdash;I tire you,
      sir.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Nay,' cried O'Mara, 'I listen patiently&mdash;proceed.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'For all these services, and they were not, as I have said, few or
      valueless, I have received little more reward than liberal promises; you
      have told me often that this should be mended&mdash;I'll make it easily
      done&mdash;I'm not unreasonable&mdash;I should be contented to hold
      Heathcote's ground, along with this small farm on which we stand, as full
      quittance of all obligations and promises between us.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'But how the devil can I effect that for you; this farm, it is true, I, or
      my father, rather, may lease to you, but Heathcote's title we cannot
      impugn; and even if we could, you would not expect us to ruin an honest
      man, in order to make way for YOU, Ned.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'What I am,' replied Dwyer, with the calmness of one who is so accustomed
      to contemptuous insinuations as to receive them with perfect indifference,
      'is to be attributed to my devotedness to your honourable family&mdash;but
      that is neither here nor there. I do not ask you to displace Heathcote, in
      order to made room for me. I know it is out of your power to do so. Now
      hearken to me for a moment; Heathcote's property, that which he has set
      out to tenants, is worth, say in rents, at most, one hundred pounds: half
      of this yearly amount is assigned to your father, until payment be made of
      a bond for a thousand pounds, with interest and soforth. Hear me patiently
      for a moment and I have done. Now go you to Heathcote, and tell him your
      father will burn the bond, and cancel the debt, upon one condition&mdash;that
      when I am in possession of this farm, which you can lease to me on what
      terms you think suitable, he will convey over his property to me,
      reserving what life-interest may appear fair, I engaging at the same time
      to marry his daughter, and make such settlements upon her as shall be
      thought fitting&mdash;he is not a fool&mdash;the man will close with the
      offer.'
    </p>
    <p>
      O'Mara turned shortly upon Dwyer, and gazed upon him for a moment with an
      expression of almost unmixed resentment.
    </p>
    <p>
      'How,' said he at length, 'YOU contract to marry Ellen Heathcote? the
      poor, innocent, confiding, light-hearted girl. No, no, Edward Dwyer, I
      know you too well for that&mdash;your services, be they what they will,
      must not, shall not go unrewarded&mdash;your avarice shall be appeased&mdash;but
      not with a human sacrifice! Dwyer, I speak to you without disguise; you
      know me to be acquainted with your history, and what's more, with your
      character. Now tell me frankly, were I to do as you desire me, in cool
      blood, should I not prove myself a more uncompromising and unfeeling
      villain than humanity even in its most monstrous shapes has ever yet given
      birth to?'
    </p>
    <p>
      Dwyer met this impetuous language with the unmoved and impenetrable
      calmness which always marked him when excitement would have appeared in
      others; he even smiled as he replied: (and Dwyer's smile, for I have seen
      it, was characteristically of that unfortunate kind which implies, as
      regards the emotions of others, not sympathy but derision).
    </p>
    <p>
      'This eloquence goes to prove Ellen Heathcote something nearer to your
      heart than your great indifference would have led me to suppose.'
    </p>
    <p>
      There was something in the tone, perhaps in the truth of the insinuation,
      which at once kindled the quick pride and the anger of O'Mara, and he
      instantly replied:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Be silent, sir, this is insolent folly.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Whether it was that Dwyer was more keenly interested in the success of his
      suit, or more deeply disappointed at its failure than he cared to express,
      or that he was in a less complacent mood than was his wont, it is certain
      that his countenance expressed more emotion at this direct insult than it
      had ever exhibited before under similar circumstances; for his eyes
      gleamed for an instant with savage and undisguised ferocity upon the young
      man, and a dark glow crossed his brow, and for the moment he looked about
      to spring at the throat of his insolent patron; but the impulse whatever
      it might be, was quickly suppressed, and before O'Mara had time to detect
      the scowl, it had vanished.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Nay, sir,' said Dwyer, 'I meant no offence, and I will take none, at your
      hands at least. I will confess I care not, in love and soforth, a single
      bean for the girl; she was the mere channel through which her father's
      wealth, if such a pittance deserves the name, was to have flowed into my
      possession&mdash;'twas in respect of your family finances the most
      economical provision for myself which I could devise&mdash;a matter in
      which you, not I, are interested. As for women, they are all pretty much
      alike to me. I am too old myself to make nice distinctions, and too ugly
      to succeed by Cupid's arts; and when a man despairs of success, he soon
      ceases to care for it. So, if you know me, as you profess to do, rest
      satisfied "caeteris paribus;" the money part of the transaction being
      equally advantageous, I should regret the loss of Ellen Heathcote just as
      little as I should the escape of a minnow from my landing-net.'
    </p>
    <p>
      They walked on for a few minutes in silence, which was not broken till
      Dwyer, who had climbed a stile in order to pass a low stone wall which lay
      in their way, exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      'By the rood, she's here&mdash;how like a philosopher you look.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The conscious blood mounted to O'Mara's cheek; he crossed the stile, and,
      separated from him only by a slight fence and a gate, stood the subject of
      their recent and somewhat angry discussion.
    </p>
    <p>
      'God save you, Miss Heathcote,' cried Dwyer, approaching the gate.
    </p>
    <p>
      The salutation was cheerfully returned, and before anything more could
      pass, O'Mara had joined the party.
    </p>
    <p>
      My friend, that you may understand the strength and depth of those
      impetuous passions, that you may account for the fatal infatuation which
      led to the catastrophe which I have to relate, I must tell you, that
      though I have seen the beauties of cities and of courts, with all the
      splendour of studied ornament about them to enhance their graces,
      possessing charms which had made them known almost throughout the world,
      and worshipped with the incense of a thousand votaries, yet never, nowhere
      did I behold a being of such exquisite and touching beauty, as that
      possessed by the creature of whom I have just spoken. At the moment of
      which I write, she was standing near the gate, close to which several
      brown-armed, rosy-cheeked damsels were engaged in milking the peaceful
      cows, who stood picturesquely grouped together. She had just thrown back
      the hood which is the graceful characteristic of the Irish girl's attire,
      so that her small and classic head was quite uncovered, save only by the
      dark-brown hair, which with graceful simplicity was parted above her
      forehead. There was nothing to shade the clearness of her beautiful
      complexion; the delicately-formed features, so exquisite when taken
      singly, so indescribable when combined, so purely artless, yet so meet for
      all expression. She was a thing so very beautiful, you could not look on
      her without feeling your heart touched as by sweet music. Whose lightest
      action was a grace&mdash;whose lightest word a spell&mdash;no limner's
      art, though ne'er so perfect, could shadow forth her beauty; and do I dare
      with feeble words try to make you see it?(1) Providence is indeed no
      respecter of persons, its blessings and its inflictions are apportioned
      with an undistinguishing hand, and until the race is over, and life be
      done, none can know whether those perfections, which seemed its goodliest
      gifts, many not prove its most fatal; but enough of this.
    </p>
    <p>
      (1) Father Purcell seems to have had an admiration for the beauties of
      nature, particularly as developed in the fair sex; a habit of mind which
      has been rather improved upon than discontinued by his successors from
      Maynooth.&mdash;ED.
    </p>
    <p>
      Dwyer strolled carelessly onward by the banks of the stream, leaving his
      young companion leaning over the gate in close and interesting parlance
      with Ellen Heathcote; as he moved on, he half thought, half uttered words
      to this effect:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Insolent young spawn of ingratitude and guilt, how long must I submit to
      be trod upon thus; and yet why should I murmur&mdash;his day is even now
      declining&mdash;and if I live a year, I shall see the darkness cover him
      and his for ever. Scarce half his broad estates shall save him&mdash;but I
      must wait&mdash;I am but a pauper now&mdash;a beggar's accusation is
      always a libel&mdash;they must reward me soon&mdash;and were I independent
      once, I'd make them feel my power, and feel it SO, that I should die the
      richest or the best avenged servant of a great man that has ever been
      heard of&mdash;yes, I must wait&mdash;I must make sure of something at
      least&mdash;I must be able to stand by myself&mdash;and then&mdash;and
      then&mdash;' He clutched his fingers together, as if in the act of
      strangling the object of his hatred. 'But one thing shall save him&mdash;but
      one thing only&mdash;he shall pay me my own price&mdash;and if he acts
      liberally, as no doubt he will do, upon compulsion, why he saves his
      reputation&mdash;perhaps his neck&mdash;the insolent young whelp yonder
      would speak in an humbler key if he but knew his father's jeopardy&mdash;but
      all in good time.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He now stood upon the long, steep, narrow bridge, which crossed the river
      close to Carrigvarah, the family mansion of the O'Maras; he looked back in
      the direction in which he had left his companion, and leaning upon the
      battlement, he ruminated long and moodily. At length he raised himself and
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'He loves the girl, and WILL love her more&mdash;I have an opportunity of
      winning favour, of doing service, which shall bind him to me; yes, he
      shall have the girl, if I have art to compass the matter. I must think
      upon it.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He entered the avenue and was soon lost in the distance.
    </p>
    <p>
      Days and weeks passed on, and young O'Mara daily took his rod and net, and
      rambled up the river; and scarce twelve hours elapsed in which some of
      those accidents, which invariably bring lovers together, did not secure
      him a meeting of longer or shorter duration, with the beautiful girl whom
      he so fatally loved.
    </p>
    <p>
      One evening, after a long interview with her, in which he had been almost
      irresistibly prompted to declare his love, and had all but yielded himself
      up to the passionate impulse, upon his arrival at home he found a letter
      on the table awaiting his return; it was from his father to the following
      effect:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
          'To Richard O'Mara.
          'September, 17&mdash;, L&mdash;&mdash;m, England.

     'MY DEAR SON,&mdash;
 'I have just had a severe attack of
my old and almost forgotten enemy, the gout. This I regard as a good
sign; the doctors telling me that it is the safest development of
peccant humours; and I think my chest is less tormenting and oppressed
than I have known it for some years. My chief reason for writing to you
now, as I do it not without difficulty, is to let you know my pleasure
in certain matters, in which I suspect some shameful, and, indeed,
infatuated neglect on your part, "quem perdere vult deus prius
dementat:" how comes it that you have neglected to write to Lady Emily
or any of that family? the understood relation subsisting between you is
one of extreme delicacy, and which calls for marked and courteous, nay,
devoted attention upon your side. Lord &mdash;&mdash; is already offended; beware
what you do; for as you will find, if this match be lost by your fault
or folly, by &mdash;&mdash; I will cut you off with a shilling. I am not in the
habit of using threats when I do not mean to fulfil them, and that you
well know; however I do not think you have much real cause for alarm in
this case. Lady Emily, who, by the way, looks if possible more charming
than ever, is anything but hard-hearted, at least when YOU solicit; but
do as I desire, and lose no time in making what excuse you may, and
let me hear from you when you can fix a time to join me and your mother
here.
</pre>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
'Your sincere well-wisher and father,

'RICHARD O'MARA.'
</pre>
    <p>
      In this letter was inclosed a smaller one, directed to Dwyer, and
      containing a cheque for twelve pounds, with the following words:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Make use of the enclosed, and let me hear if Richard is upon any wild
      scheme at present: I am uneasy about him, and not without reason; report
      to me speedily the result of your vigilance.
    </p>
    <p>
      'R. O'MARA.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Dwyer just glanced through this brief, but not unwelcome, epistle; and
      deposited it and its contents in the secret recesses of his breeches
      pocket, and then fixed his eyes upon the face of his companion, who sat
      opposite, utterly absorbed in the perusal of his father's letter, which he
      read again and again, pausing and muttering between whiles, and apparently
      lost in no very pleasing reflections. At length he very abruptly
      exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      'A delicate epistle, truly&mdash;and a politic&mdash;would that my tongue
      had been burned through before I assented to that doubly-cursed contract.
      Why, I am not pledged yet&mdash;I am not; there is neither writing, nor
      troth, nor word of honour, passed between us. My father has no right to
      pledge me, even though I told him I liked the girl, and would wish the
      match. 'Tis not enough that my father offers her my heart and hand; he has
      no right to do it; a delicate woman would not accept professions made by
      proxy. Lady Emily! Lady Emily! with all the tawdry frippery, and finery of
      dress and demeanour&mdash;compare HER with&mdash;&mdash; Pshaw!
      Ridiculous! How blind, how idiotic I have been.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He relapsed into moody reflections, which Dwyer did not care to disturb,
      and some ten minutes might have passed before he spoke again. When he did,
      it was in the calm tone of one who has irrevocably resolved upon some
      decided and important act.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Dwyer,' he said, rising and approaching that person, 'whatever god or
      demon told you, even before my own heart knew it, that I loved Ellen
      Heathcote, spoke truth. I love her madly&mdash;I never dreamed till now
      how fervently, how irrevocably, I am hers&mdash;how dead to me all other
      interests are. Dwyer, I know something of your disposition, and you no
      doubt think it strange that I should tell to you, of all persons, SUCH a
      secret; but whatever be your faults, I think you are attached to our
      family. I am satisfied you will not betray me. I know&mdash;&mdash;'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Pardon me,' said Dwyer, 'if I say that great professions of confidence
      too frequently mark distrust. I have no possible motive to induce me to
      betray you; on the contrary, I would gladly assist and direct whatever
      plans you may have formed. Command me as you please; I have said enough.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I will not doubt you, Dwyer,' said O'Mara; 'I have taken my resolution&mdash;I
      have, I think, firmness to act up to it. To marry Ellen Heathcote,
      situated as I am, were madness; to propose anything else were worse, were
      villainy not to be named. I will leave the country to-morrow, cost what
      pain it may, for England. I will at once break off the proposed alliance
      with Lady Emily, and will wait until I am my own master, to open my heart
      to Ellen. My father may say and do what he likes; but his passion will not
      last. He will forgive me; and even were he to disinherit me, as he
      threatens, there is some property which must descend to me, which his will
      cannot affect. He cannot ruin my interests; he SHALL NOT ruin my
      happiness. Dwyer, give me pen and ink; I will write this moment.'
    </p>
    <p>
      This bold plan of proceeding for many reasons appeared inexpedient to
      Dwyer, and he determined not to consent to its adoption without a
      struggle.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I commend your prudence,' said he, 'in determining to remove yourself
      from the fascinating influence which has so long bound you here; but
      beware of offending your father. Colonel O'Mara is not a man to forgive an
      act of deliberate disobedience, and surely you are not mad enough to ruin
      yourself with him by offering an outrageous insult to Lady Emily and to
      her family in her person; therefore you must not break off the understood
      contract which subsists between you by any formal act&mdash;hear me out
      patiently. You must let Lady Emily perceive, as you easily may, without
      rudeness or even coldness of manner, that she is perfectly indifferent to
      you; and when she understands this to be the case, it she possesses either
      delicacy or spirit, she will herself break off the engagement. Make what
      delay it is possible to effect; it is very possible that your father, who
      cannot, in all probability, live many months, may not live as many days if
      harassed and excited by such scenes as your breaking off your engagement
      must produce.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Dwyer,' said O'Mara, 'I will hear you out&mdash;proceed.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Besides, sir, remember,' he continued, 'the understanding which we have
      termed an engagement was entered into without any direct sanction upon
      your part; your father has committed HIMSELF, not YOU, to Lord &mdash;&mdash;.
      Before a real contract can subsist, you must be an assenting party to it.
      I know of no casuistry subtle enough to involve you in any engagement
      whatever, without such an ingredient. Tush! you have an easy card to
      play.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well,' said the young man, 'I will think on what you have said; in the
      meantime, I will write to my father to announce my immediate departure, in
      order to join him.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Excuse me,' said Dwyer, 'but I would suggest that by hastening your
      departure you but bring your dangers nearer. While you are in this country
      a letter now and then keeps everything quiet; but once across the Channel
      and with the colonel, you must either quarrel with him to your own
      destruction, or you must dance attendance upon Lady Emily with such
      assiduity as to commit yourself as completely as if you had been thrice
      called with her in the parish church. No, no; keep to this side of the
      Channel as long as you decently can. Besides, your sudden departure must
      appear suspicious, and will probably excite inquiry. Every good end likely
      to be accomplished by your absence will be effected as well by your
      departure for Dublin, where you may remain for three weeks or a month
      without giving rise to curiosity or doubt of an unpleasant kind; I would
      therefore advise you strongly to write immediately to the colonel, stating
      that business has occurred to defer your departure for a month, and you
      can then leave this place, if you think fit, immediately, that is, within
      a week or so.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Young O'Mara was not hard to be persuaded. Perhaps it was that,
      unacknowledged by himself, any argument which recommended his staying,
      even for an hour longer than his first decision had announced, in the
      neighbourhood of Ellen Heathcote, appeared peculiarly cogent and
      convincing; however this may have been, it is certain that he followed the
      counsel of his cool-headed follower, who retired that night to bed with
      the pleasing conviction that he was likely soon to involve his young
      patron in all the intricacies of disguise and intrigue&mdash;a
      consummation which would leave him totally at the mercy of the favoured
      confidant who should possess his secret.
    </p>
    <p>
      Young O'Mara's reflections were more agitating and less satisfactory than
      those of his companion. He resolved upon leaving the country before two
      days had passed. He felt that he could not fairly seek to involve Ellen
      Heathcote in his fate by pledge or promise, until he had extricated
      himself from those trammels which constrained and embarrassed all his
      actions. His determination was so far prudent; but, alas! he also resolved
      that it was but right, but necessary, that he should see her before his
      departure. His leaving the country without a look or a word of parting
      kindness interchanged, must to her appear an act of cold and heartless
      caprice; he could not bear the thought.
    </p>
    <p>
      'No,' said he, 'I am not child enough to say more than prudence tells me
      ought to say; this cowardly distrust of my firmness I should and will
      contemn. Besides, why should I commit myself? It is possible the girl may
      not care for me. No, no; I need not shrink from this interview. I have no
      reason to doubt my firmness&mdash;none&mdash;none. I must cease to be
      governed by impulse. I am involved in rocks and quicksands; and a
      collected spirit, a quick eye, and a steady hand, alone can pilot me
      through. God grant me a safe voyage!'
    </p>
    <p>
      The next day came, and young O'Mara did not take his fishing-rod as usual,
      but wrote two letters; the one to his father, announcing his intention of
      departing speedily for England; the other to Lady Emily, containing a cold
      but courteous apology for his apparent neglect. Both these were despatched
      to the post-office that evening, and upon the next morning he was to leave
      the country.
    </p>
    <p>
      Upon the night of the momentous day of which we have just spoken, Ellen
      Heathcote glided silently and unperceived from among the busy crowds who
      were engaged in the gay dissipation furnished by what is in Ireland
      commonly called a dance (the expenses attendant upon which, music, etc.,
      are defrayed by a subscription of one halfpenny each), and having drawn
      her mantle closely about her, was proceeding with quick steps to traverse
      the small field which separated her from her father's abode. She had not
      walked many yards when she became aware that a solitary figure, muffled in
      a cloak, stood in the pathway. It approached; a low voice whispered:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Ellen.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Is it you, Master Richard?' she replied.
    </p>
    <p>
      He threw back the cloak which had concealed his features.
    </p>
    <p>
      'It is I, Ellen, he said; 'I have been watching for you. I will not delay
      you long.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He took her hand, and she did not attempt to withdraw it; for she was too
      artless to think any evil, too confiding to dread it.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Ellen,' he continued, even now unconsciously departing from the rigid
      course which prudence had marked out; 'Ellen, I am going to leave the
      country; going to-morrow. I have had letters from England. I must go; and
      the sea will soon be between us.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He paused, and she was silent.
    </p>
    <p>
      'There is one request, one entreaty I have to make,' he continued; 'I
      would, when I am far away, have something to look at which belonged to
      you. Will you give me&mdash;do not refuse it&mdash;one little lock of your
      beautiful hair?'
    </p>
    <p>
      With artless alacrity, but with trembling hand, she took the scissors,
      which in simple fashion hung by her side, and detached one of the long and
      beautiful locks which parted over her forehead. She placed it in his hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      Again he took her hand, and twice he attempted to speak in vain; at length
      he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Ellen, when I am gone&mdash;when I am away&mdash;will you sometimes
      remember, sometimes think of me?'
    </p>
    <p>
      Ellen Heathcote had as much, perhaps more, of what is noble in pride than
      the haughtiest beauty that ever trod a court; but the effort was useless;
      the honest struggle was in vain; and she burst into floods of tears,
      bitterer than she had ever shed before.
    </p>
    <p>
      I cannot tell how passions rise and fall; I cannot describe the impetuous
      words of the young lover, as pressing again and again to his lips the
      cold, passive hand, which had been resigned to him, prudence, caution,
      doubts, resolutions, all vanished from his view, and melted into nothing.
      'Tis for me to tell the simple fact, that from that brief interview they
      both departed promised and pledged to each other for ever.
    </p>
    <p>
      Through the rest of this story events follow one another rapidly.
    </p>
    <p>
      A few nights after that which I have just mentioned, Ellen Heathcote
      disappeared; but her father was not left long in suspense as to her fate,
      for Dwyer, accompanied by one of those mendicant friars who traversed the
      country then even more commonly than they now do, called upon Heathcote
      before he had had time to take any active measures for the recovery of his
      child, and put him in possession of a document which appeared to contain
      satisfactory evidence of the marriage of Ellen Heathcote with Richard
      O'Mara, executed upon the evening previous, as the date went to show; and
      signed by both parties, as well as by Dwyer and a servant of young
      O'Mara's, both these having acted as witnesses; and further supported by
      the signature of Peter Nicholls, a brother of the order of St. Francis, by
      whom the ceremony had been performed, and whom Heathcote had no difficulty
      in recognising in the person of his visitant.
    </p>
    <p>
      This document, and the prompt personal visit of the two men, and above
      all, the known identity of the Franciscan, satisfied Heathcote as fully as
      anything short of complete publicity could have done. And his conviction
      was not a mistaken one.
    </p>
    <p>
      Dwyer, before he took his leave, impressed upon Heathcote the necessity of
      keeping the affair so secret as to render it impossible that it should
      reach Colonel O'Mara's ears, an event which would have been attended with
      ruinous consequences to all parties. He refused, also, to permit Heathcote
      to see his daughter, and even to tell him where she was, until
      circumstances rendered it safe for him to visit her.
    </p>
    <p>
      Heathcote was a harsh and sullen man; and though his temper was anything
      but tractable, there was so much to please, almost to dazzle him, in the
      event, that he accepted the terms which Dwyer imposed upon him without any
      further token of disapprobation than a shake of the head, and a gruff wish
      that 'it might prove all for the best.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Nearly two months had passed, and young O'Mara had not yet departed for
      England. His letters had been strangely few and far between; and in short,
      his conduct was such as to induce Colonel O'Mara to hasten his return to
      Ireland, and at the same time to press an engagement, which Lord &mdash;&mdash;,
      his son Captain N&mdash;&mdash;, and Lady Emily had made to spend some
      weeks with him at his residence in Dublin.
    </p>
    <p>
      A letter arrived for young O'Mara, stating the arrangement, and requiring
      his attendance in Dublin, which was accordingly immediately afforded.
    </p>
    <p>
      He arrived, with Dwyer, in time to welcome his father and his
      distinguished guests. He resolved to break off his embarrassing connection
      with Lady Emily, without, however, stating the real motive, which he felt
      would exasperate the resentment which his father and Lord &mdash;&mdash;
      would no doubt feel at his conduct.
    </p>
    <p>
      He strongly felt how dishonourably he would act if, in obedience to
      Dwyer's advice, he seemed tacitly to acquiesce in an engagement which it
      was impossible for him to fulfil. He knew that Lady Emily was not capable
      of anything like strong attachment; and that even if she were, he had no
      reason whatever to suppose that she cared at all for him.
    </p>
    <p>
      He had not at any time desired the alliance; nor had he any reason to
      suppose the young lady in any degree less indifferent. He regarded it now,
      and not without some appearance of justice, as nothing more than a kind of
      understood stipulation, entered into by their parents, and to be
      considered rather as a matter of business and calculation than as
      involving anything of mutual inclination on the part of the parties most
      nearly interested in the matter.
    </p>
    <p>
      He anxiously, therefore, watched for an opportunity of making known his
      feelings to Lord &mdash;&mdash;, as he could not with propriety do so to
      Lady Emily; but what at a distance appeared to be a matter of easy
      accomplishment, now, upon a nearer approach, and when the immediate
      impulse which had prompted the act had subsided, appeared so full of
      difficulty and almost inextricable embarrassments, that he involuntarily
      shrunk from the task day after day.
    </p>
    <p>
      Though it was a source of indescribable anxiety to him, he did not venture
      to write to Ellen, for he could not disguise from himself the danger which
      the secrecy of his connection with her must incur by his communicating
      with her, even through a public office, where their letters might be
      permitted to lie longer than the gossiping inquisitiveness of a country
      town would warrant him in supposing safe.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was about a fortnight after young O'Mara had arrived in Dublin, where
      all things, and places, and amusements; and persons seemed thoroughly
      stale, flat, and unprofitable, when one day, tempted by the unusual
      fineness of the weather, Lady Emily proposed a walk in the College Park, a
      favourite promenade at that time. She therefore with young O'Mara,
      accompanied by Dwyer (who, by-the-by, when he pleased, could act the
      gentleman sufficiently well), proceeded to the place proposed, where they
      continued to walk for some time.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Why, Richard,' said Lady Emily, after a tedious and unbroken pause of
      some minutes, 'you are becoming worse and worse every day. You are growing
      absolutely intolerable; perfectly stupid! not one good thing have I heard
      since I left the house.'
    </p>
    <p>
      O'Mara smiled, and was seeking for a suitable reply, when his design was
      interrupted, and his attention suddenly and painfully arrested, by the
      appearance of two figures, who were slowly passing the broad walk on which
      he and his party moved; the one was that of Captain N&mdash;&mdash;, the
      other was the form of&mdash;Martin Heathcote!
    </p>
    <p>
      O'Mara felt confounded, almost stunned; the anticipation of some impending
      mischief&mdash;of an immediate and violent collision with a young man whom
      he had ever regarded as his friend, were apprehensions which such a
      juxtaposition could not fail to produce.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Is Heathcote mad?' thought he. 'What devil can have brought him here?'
    </p>
    <p>
      Dwyer having exchanged a significant glance with O'Mara, said slightly to
      Lady Emily:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Will your ladyship excuse me for a moment? I have a word to say to
      Captain N&mdash;&mdash;, and will, with your permission, immediately
      rejoin you.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He bowed, and walking rapidly on, was in a few moments beside the object
      of his and his patron's uneasiness.
    </p>
    <p>
      Whatever Heathcote's object might be, he certainly had not yet declared
      the secret, whose safety O'Mara had so naturally desired, for Captain N&mdash;&mdash;
      appeared in good spirits; and on coming up to his sister and her
      companion, he joined them for a moment, telling O'Mara, laughingly, that
      an old quiz had come from the country for the express purpose of telling
      tales, as it was to be supposed, of him (young O'Mara), in whose
      neighbourhood he lived.
    </p>
    <p>
      During this speech it required all the effort which it was possible to
      exert to prevent O'Mara's betraying the extreme agitation to which his
      situation gave rise. Captain N&mdash;&mdash;, however, suspected nothing,
      and passed on without further delay.
    </p>
    <p>
      Dinner was an early meal in those days, and Lady Emily was obliged to
      leave the Park in less than half an hour after the unpleasant meeting
      which we have just mentioned.
    </p>
    <p>
      Young O'Mara and, at a sign from him, Dwyer having escorted the lady to
      the door of Colonel O'Mara's house, pretended an engagement, and departed
      together.
    </p>
    <p>
      Richard O'Mara instantly questioned his comrade upon the subject of his
      anxiety; but Dwyer had nothing to communicate of a satisfactory nature. He
      had only time, while the captain had been engaged with Lady Emily and her
      companion, to say to Heathcote:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Be secret, as you value your existence: everything will be right, if you
      be but secret.'
    </p>
    <p>
      To this Heathcote had replied: 'Never fear me; I understand what I am
      about.'
    </p>
    <p>
      This was said in such an ambiguous manner that it was impossible to
      conjecture whether he intended or not to act upon Dwyer's exhortation. The
      conclusion which appeared most natural, was by no means an agreeable one.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was much to be feared that Heathcote having heard some vague report of
      O'Mara's engagement with Lady Emily, perhaps exaggerated, by the
      repetition, into a speedily approaching marriage, had become alarmed for
      his daughter's interest, and had taken this decisive step in order to
      prevent, by a disclosure of the circumstances of his clandestine union
      with Ellen, the possibility of his completing a guilty alliance with
      Captain N&mdash;&mdash;'s sister. If he entertained the suspicions which
      they attributed to him, he had certainly taken the most effectual means to
      prevent their being realised. Whatever his object might be, his presence
      in Dublin, in company with Captain N&mdash;&mdash;, boded nothing good to
      O'Mara.
    </p>
    <p>
      They entered &mdash;&mdash;'s tavern, in Dame Street, together; and there,
      over a hasty and by no means a comfortable meal, they talked over their
      plans and conjectures. Evening closed in, and found them still closeted
      together, with nothing to interrupt, and a large tankard of claret to
      sustain their desultory conversation.
    </p>
    <p>
      Nothing had been determined upon, except that Dwyer and O'Mara should
      proceed under cover of the darkness to search the town for Heathcote, and
      by minute inquiries at the most frequented houses of entertainment, to
      ascertain his place of residence, in order to procuring a full and
      explanatory interview with him. They had each filled their last glass, and
      were sipping it slowly, seated with their feet stretched towards a bright
      cheerful fire; the small table which sustained the flagon of which we have
      spoken, together with two pair of wax candles, placed between them, so as
      to afford a convenient resting-place for the long glasses out of which
      they drank.
    </p>
    <p>
      'One good result, at all events, will be effected by Heathcote's visit,'
      said O'Mara. 'Before twenty-four hours I shall do that which I should have
      done long ago. I shall, without reserve, state everything. I can no longer
      endure this suspense&mdash;this dishonourable secrecy&mdash;this apparent
      dissimulation. Every moment I have passed since my departure from the
      country has been one of embarrassment, of pain, of humiliation. To-morrow
      I will brave the storm, whether successfully or not is doubtful; but I had
      rather walk the high roads a beggar, than submit a day longer to be made
      the degraded sport of every accident&mdash;the miserable dependent upon a
      successful system of deception. Though PASSIVE deception, it is still
      unmanly, unworthy, unjustifiable deception. I cannot bear to think of it.
      I despise myself, but I will cease to be the despicable thing I have
      become. To-morrow sees me free, and this harassing subject for ever at
      rest.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He was interrupted here by the sound of footsteps heavily but rapidly
      ascending the tavern staircase. The room door opened, and Captain N&mdash;&mdash;,
      accompanied by a fashionably-attired young man, entered the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      Young O'Mara had risen from his seat on the entrance of their unexpected
      visitants; and the moment Captain N&mdash;&mdash; recognised his person,
      an evident and ominous change passed over his countenance. He turned
      hastily to withdraw, but, as it seemed, almost instantly changed his mind,
      for he turned again abruptly.
    </p>
    <p>
      'This chamber is engaged, sir,' said the waiter.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Leave the room, sir,' was his only reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      'The room is engaged, sir,' repeated the waiter, probably believing that
      his first suggestion had been unheard.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Leave the room, or go to hell!' shouted Captain N&mdash;&mdash;; at the
      same time seizing the astounded waiter by the shoulder, he hurled him
      headlong into the passage, and flung the door to with a crash that shook
      the walls. 'Sir,' continued he, addressing himself to O'Mara, 'I did not
      hope to have met you until to-morrow. Fortune has been kind to me&mdash;draw,
      and defend yourself.'
    </p>
    <p>
      At the same time he drew his sword, and placed himself in an attitude of
      attack.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I will not draw upon YOU,' said O'Mara. 'I have, indeed, wronged you. I
      have given you just cause for resentment; but against your life I will
      never lift my hand.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'You are a coward, sir,' replied Captain N&mdash;&mdash;, with almost
      frightful vehemence, 'as every trickster and swindler IS. You are a
      contemptible dastard&mdash;a despicable, damned villain! Draw your sword,
      sir, and defend your life, or every post and pillar in this town shall
      tell your infamy.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Perhaps,' said his friend, with a sneer, 'the gentleman can do better
      without his honour than without his wife.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Yes,' shouted the captain, 'his wife&mdash;a trull&mdash;a common&mdash;&mdash;'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Silence, sir!' cried O'Mara, all the fierceness of his nature roused by
      this last insult&mdash;'your object is gained; your blood be upon your own
      head.' At the same time he sprang across a bench which stood in his way,
      and pushing aside the table which supported the lights, in an instant
      their swords crossed, and they were engaged in close and deadly strife.
    </p>
    <p>
      Captain N&mdash;&mdash; was far the stronger of the two; but, on the other
      hand, O'Mara possessed far more skill in the use of the fatal weapon which
      they employed. But the narrowness of the room rendered this advantage
      hardly available.
    </p>
    <p>
      Almost instantly O'Mara received a slight wound upon the forehead, which,
      though little more than a scratch, bled so fast as to obstruct his sight
      considerably.
    </p>
    <p>
      Those who have used the foil can tell how slight a derangement of eye or
      of hand is sufficient to determine a contest of this kind; and this
      knowledge will prevent their being surprised when I say, that, spite of
      O'Mara's superior skill and practice, his adversary's sword passed twice
      through and through his body, and he fell heavily and helplessly upon the
      floor of the chamber.
    </p>
    <p>
      Without saying a word, the successful combatant quitted the room along
      with his companion, leaving Dwyer to shift as best he might for his fallen
      comrade.
    </p>
    <p>
      With the assistance of some of the wondering menials of the place, Dwyer
      succeeded in conveying the wounded man into an adjoining room, where he
      was laid upon a bed, in a state bordering upon insensibility&mdash;the
      blood flowing, I might say WELLING, from the wounds so fast as to show
      that unless the bleeding were speedily and effectually stopped, he could
      not live for half an hour.
    </p>
    <p>
      Medical aid was, of course, instantly procured, and Colonel O'Mara, though
      at the time seriously indisposed, was urgently requested to attend without
      loss of time. He did so; but human succour and support were all too late.
      The wound had been truly dealt&mdash;the tide of life had ebbed; and his
      father had not arrived five minutes when young O'Mara was a corpse. His
      body rests in the vaults of Christ Church, in Dublin, without a stone to
      mark the spot.
    </p>
    <p>
      The counsels of the wicked are always dark, and their motives often beyond
      fathoming; and strange, unaccountable, incredible as it may seem, I do
      believe, and that upon evidence so clear as to amount almost to
      demonstration, that Heathcote's visit to Dublin&mdash;his betrayal of the
      secret&mdash;and the final and terrible catastrophe which laid O'Mara in
      the grave, were brought about by no other agent than Dwyer himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      I have myself seen the letter which induced that visit. The handwriting is
      exactly what I have seen in other alleged specimens of Dwyer's penmanship.
      It is written with an affectation of honest alarm at O'Mara's conduct, and
      expresses a conviction that if some of Lady Emily's family be not informed
      of O'Mara's real situation, nothing could prevent his concluding with her
      an advantageous alliance, then upon the tapis, and altogether throwing off
      his allegiance to Ellen&mdash;a step which, as the writer candidly
      asserted, would finally conduce as inevitably to his own disgrace as it
      immediately would to her ruin and misery.
    </p>
    <p>
      The production was formally signed with Dwyer's name, and the postscript
      contained a strict injunction of secrecy, asserting that if it were
      ascertained that such an epistle had been despatched from such a quarter,
      it would be attended with the total ruin of the writer.
    </p>
    <p>
      It is true that Dwyer, many years after, when this letter came to light,
      alleged it to be a forgery, an assertion whose truth, even to his dying
      hour, and long after he had apparently ceased to feel the lash of public
      scorn, he continued obstinately to maintain. Indeed this matter is full of
      mystery, for, revenge alone excepted, which I believe, in such minds as
      Dwyer's, seldom overcomes the sense of interest, the only intelligible
      motive which could have prompted him to such an act was the hope that
      since he had, through young O'Mara's interest, procured from the colonel a
      lease of a small farm upon the terms which he had originally stipulated,
      he might prosecute his plan touching the property of Martin Heathcote,
      rendering his daughter's hand free by the removal of young O'Mara. This
      appears to me too complicated a plan of villany to have entered the mind
      even of such a man as Dwyer. I must, therefore, suppose his motives to
      have originated out of circumstances connected with this story which may
      not have come to my ear, and perhaps never will.
    </p>
    <p>
      Colonel O'Mara felt the death of his son more deeply than I should have
      thought possible; but that son had been the last being who had continued
      to interest his cold heart. Perhaps the pride which he felt in his child
      had in it more of selfishness than of any generous feeling. But, be this
      as it may, the melancholy circumstances connected with Ellen Heathcote had
      reached him, and his conduct towards her proved, more strongly than
      anything else could have done, that he felt keenly and justly, and, to a
      certain degree, with a softened heart, the fatal event of which she had
      been, in some manner, alike the cause and the victim.
    </p>
    <p>
      He evinced not towards her, as might have been expected, any unreasonable
      resentment. On the contrary, he exhibited great consideration, even
      tenderness, for her situation; and having ascertained where his son had
      placed her, he issued strict orders that she should not be disturbed, and
      that the fatal tidings, which had not yet reached her, should be withheld
      until they might be communicated in such a way as to soften as much as
      possible the inevitable shock.
    </p>
    <p>
      These last directions were acted upon too scrupulously and too long; and,
      indeed, I am satisfied that had the event been communicated at once,
      however terrible and overwhelming the shock might have been, much of the
      bitterest anguish, of sickening doubts, of harassing suspense, would have
      been spared her, and the first tempestuous burst of sorrow having passed
      over, her chastened spirit might have recovered its tone, and her life
      have been spared. But the mistaken kindness which concealed from her the
      dreadful truth, instead of relieving her mind of a burden which it could
      not support, laid upon it a weight of horrible fears and doubts as to the
      affection of O'Mara, compared with which even the certainty of his death
      would have been tolerable.
    </p>
    <p>
      One evening I had just seated myself beside a cheerful turf fire, with
      that true relish which a long cold ride through a bleak and shelterless
      country affords, stretching my chilled limbs to meet the genial influence,
      and imbibing the warmth at every pore, when my comfortable meditations
      were interrupted by a long and sonorous ringing at the door-bell evidently
      effected by no timid hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      A messenger had arrived to request my attendance at the Lodge&mdash;such
      was the name which distinguished a small and somewhat antiquated building,
      occupying a peculiarly secluded position among the bleak and heathy hills
      which varied the surface of that not altogether uninteresting district,
      and which had, I believe, been employed by the keen and hardy ancestors of
      the O'Mara family as a convenient temporary residence during the sporting
      season.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thither my attendance was required, in order to administer to a deeply
      distressed lady such comforts as an afflicted mind can gather from the
      sublime hopes and consolations of Christianity.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had long suspected that the occupant of this sequestered, I might say
      desolate, dwelling-house was the poor girl whose brief story we are
      following; and feeling a keen interest in her fate&mdash;as who that had
      ever seen her DID NOT?&mdash;I started from my comfortable seat with more
      eager alacrity than, I will confess it, I might have evinced had my duty
      called me in another direction.
    </p>
    <p>
      In a few minutes I was trotting rapidly onward, preceded by my guide, who
      urged his horse with the remorseless rapidity of one who seeks by the
      speed of his progress to escape observation. Over roads and through bogs
      we splashed and clattered, until at length traversing the brow of a wild
      and rocky hill, whose aspect seemed so barren and forbidding that it might
      have been a lasting barrier alike to mortal sight and step, the lonely
      building became visible, lying in a kind of swampy flat, with a broad
      reedy pond or lake stretching away to its side, and backed by a farther
      range of monotonous sweeping hills, marked with irregular lines of grey
      rock, which, in the distance, bore a rude and colossal resemblance to the
      walls of a fortification.
    </p>
    <p>
      Riding with undiminished speed along a kind of wild horse-track, we turned
      the corner of a high and somewhat ruinous wall of loose stones, and making
      a sudden wheel we found ourselves in a small quadrangle, surmounted on two
      sides by dilapidated stables and kennels, on another by a broken stone
      wall, and upon the fourth by the front of the lodge itself.
    </p>
    <p>
      The whole character of the place was that of dreary desertion and decay,
      which would of itself have predisposed the mind for melancholy
      impressions. My guide dismounted, and with respectful attention held my
      horse's bridle while I got down; and knocking at the door with the handle
      of his whip, it was speedily opened by a neatly-dressed female domestic,
      and I was admitted to the interior of the house, and conducted into a
      small room, where a fire in some degree dispelled the cheerless air, which
      would otherwise have prevailed to a painful degree throughout the place.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had been waiting but for a very few minutes when another female servant,
      somewhat older than the first, entered the room. She made some apology on
      the part of the person whom I had come to visit, for the slight delay
      which had already occurred, and requested me further to wait for a few
      minutes longer, intimating that the lady's grief was so violent, that
      without great effort she could not bring herself to speak calmly at all.
      As if to beguile the time, the good dame went on in a highly communicative
      strain to tell me, amongst much that could not interest me, a little of
      what I had desired to hear. I discovered that the grief of her whom I had
      come to visit was excited by the sudden death of a little boy, her only
      child, who was then lying dead in his mother's chamber.
    </p>
    <p>
      'And the mother's name?' said I, inquiringly.
    </p>
    <p>
      The woman looked at me for a moment, smiled, and shook her head with the
      air of mingled mystery and importance which seems to say, 'I am
      unfathomable.' I did not care to press the question, though I suspected
      that much of her apparent reluctance was affected, knowing that my doubts
      respecting the identity of the person whom I had come to visit must soon
      be set at rest, and after a little pause the worthy Abigail went on as
      fluently as ever. She told me that her young mistress had been, for the
      time she had been with her&mdash;that was, for about a year and a half&mdash;in
      declining health and spirits, and that she had loved her little child to a
      degree beyond expression&mdash;so devotedly that she could not, in all
      probability, survive it long.
    </p>
    <p>
      While she was running on in this way the bell rang, and signing me to
      follow, she opened the room door, but stopped in the hall, and taking me a
      little aside, and speaking in a whisper, she told me, as I valued the life
      of the poor lady, not to say one word of the death of young O'Mara. I
      nodded acquiescence, and ascending a narrow and ill-constructed staircase,
      she stopped at a chamber door and knocked.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Come in,' said a gentle voice from within, and, preceded by my
      conductress, I entered a moderately-sized, but rather gloomy chamber.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was but one living form within it&mdash;it was the light and
      graceful figure of a young woman. She had risen as I entered the room; but
      owing to the obscurity of the apartment, and to the circumstance that her
      face, as she looked towards the door, was turned away from the light,
      which found its way in dimly through the narrow windows, I could not
      instantly recognise the features.
    </p>
    <p>
      'You do not remember me, sir?' said the same low, mournful voice. 'I am&mdash;I
      WAS&mdash;Ellen Heathcote.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I do remember you, my poor child,' said I, taking her hand; 'I do
      remember you very well. Speak to me frankly&mdash;speak to me as a friend.
      Whatever I can do or say for you, is yours already; only speak.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'You were always very kind, sir, to those&mdash;to those that WANTED
      kindness.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The tears were almost overflowing, but she checked them; and as if an
      accession of fortitude had followed the momentary weakness, she continued,
      in a subdued but firm tone, to tell me briefly the circumstances of her
      marriage with O'Mara. When she had concluded the recital, she paused for a
      moment; and I asked again:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Can I aid you in any way&mdash;by advice or otherwise?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I wish, sir, to tell you all I have been thinking about,' she continued.
      'I am sure, sir, that Master Richard loved me once&mdash;I am sure he did
      not think to deceive me; but there were bad, hard-hearted people about
      him, and his family were all rich and high, and I am sure he wishes NOW
      that he had never, never seen me. Well, sir, it is not in my heart to
      blame him. What was <i>I</i> that I should look at him?&mdash;an ignorant,
      poor, country girl&mdash;and he so high and great, and so beautiful. The
      blame was all mine&mdash;it was all my fault; I could not think or hope he
      would care for me more than a little time. Well, sir, I thought over and
      over again that since his love was gone from me for ever, I should not
      stand in his way, and hinder whatever great thing his family wished for
      him. So I thought often and often to write him a letter to get the
      marriage broken, and to send me home; but for one reason, I would have
      done it long ago: there was a little child, his and mine&mdash;the
      dearest, the loveliest.' She could not go on for a minute or two. 'The
      little child that is lying there, on that bed; but it is dead and gone,
      and there is no reason NOW why I should delay any more about it.'
    </p>
    <p>
      She put her hand into her breast, and took out a letter, which she opened.
      She put it into my hands. It ran thus:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     'DEAR MASTER RICHARD,
   'My little child is dead, and your
happiness is all I care about now. Your marriage with me is displeasing
to your family, and I would be a burden to you, and in your way in the
fine places, and among the great friends where you must be. You ought,
therefore, to break the marriage, and I will sign whatever YOU wish, or
your family. I will never try to blame you, Master Richard&mdash;do not think
it&mdash;for I never deserved your love, and must not complain now that I
have lost it; but I will always pray for you, and be thinking of you
while I live.'
</pre>
    <p>
      While I read this letter, I was satisfied that so far from adding to the
      poor girl's grief, a full disclosure of what had happened would, on the
      contrary, mitigate her sorrow, and deprive it of its sharpest sting.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Ellen,' said I solemnly, 'Richard O'Mara was never unfaithful to you; he
      is now where human reproach can reach him no more.'
    </p>
    <p>
      As I said this, the hectic flush upon her cheek gave place to a paleness
      so deadly, that I almost thought she would drop lifeless upon the spot.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Is he&mdash;is he dead, then?' said she, wildly.
    </p>
    <p>
      I took her hand in mine, and told her the sad story as best I could. She
      listened with a calmness which appeared almost unnatural, until I had
      finished the mournful narration. She then arose, and going to the bedside,
      she drew the curtain and gazed silently and fixedly on the quiet face of
      the child: but the feelings which swelled at her heart could not be
      suppressed; the tears gushed forth, and sobbing as if her heart would
      break, she leant over the bed and took the dead child in her arms.
    </p>
    <p>
      She wept and kissed it, and kissed it and wept again, in grief so
      passionate, so heartrending, as to draw bitter tears from my eyes. I said
      what little I could to calm her&mdash;to have sought to do more would have
      been a mockery; and observing that the darkness had closed in, I took my
      leave and departed, being favoured with the services of my former guide.
    </p>
    <p>
      I expected to have been soon called upon again to visit the poor girl; but
      the Lodge lay beyond the boundary of my parish, and I felt a reluctance to
      trespass upon the precincts of my brother minister, and a certain degree
      of hesitation in intruding upon one whose situation was so very peculiar,
      and who would, I had no doubt, feel no scruple in requesting my attendance
      if she desired it.
    </p>
    <p>
      A month, however, passed away, and I did not hear anything of Ellen. I
      called at the Lodge, and to my inquiries they answered that she was very
      much worse in health, and that since the death of the child she had been
      sinking fast, and so weak that she had been chiefly confined to her bed. I
      sent frequently to inquire, and often called myself, and all that I heard
      convinced me that she was rapidly sinking into the grave.
    </p>
    <p>
      Late one night I was summoned from my rest, by a visit from the person who
      had upon the former occasion acted as my guide; he had come to summon me
      to the death-bed of her whom I had then attended. With all celerity I made
      my preparations, and, not without considerable difficulty and some danger,
      we made a rapid night-ride to the Lodge, a distance of five miles at
      least. We arrived safely, and in a very short time&mdash;but too late.
    </p>
    <p>
      I stood by the bed upon which lay the once beautiful form of Ellen
      Heathcote. The brief but sorrowful trial was past&mdash;the desolate
      mourner was gone to that land where the pangs of grief, the tumults of
      passion, regrets and cold neglect, are felt no more. I leant over the
      lifeless face, and scanned the beautiful features which, living, had
      wrought such magic on all that looked upon them. They were, indeed, much
      wasted; but it was impossible for the fingers of death or of decay
      altogether to obliterate the traces of that exquisite beauty which had so
      distinguished her. As I gazed on this most sad and striking spectacle,
      remembrances thronged fast upon my mind, and tear after tear fell upon the
      cold form that slept tranquilly and for ever.
    </p>
    <p>
      A few days afterwards I was told that a funeral had left the Lodge at the
      dead of night, and had been conducted with the most scrupulous secrecy. It
      was, of course, to me no mystery.
    </p>
    <p>
      Heathcote lived to a very advanced age, being of that hard mould which is
      not easily impressionable. The selfish and the hard-hearted survive where
      nobler, more generous, and, above all, more sympathising natures would
      have sunk for ever.
    </p>
    <p>
      Dwyer certainly succeeded in extorting, I cannot say how, considerable and
      advantageous leases from Colonel O'Mara; but after his death he disposed
      of his interest in these, and having for a time launched into a sea of
      profligate extravagance, he became bankrupt, and for a long time I totally
      lost sight of him.
    </p>
    <p>
      The rebellion of '98, and the events which immediately followed, called
      him forth from his lurking-places, in the character of an informer; and I
      myself have seen the hoary-headed, paralytic perjurer, with a scowl of
      derision and defiance, brave the hootings and the execrations of the
      indignant multitude.
    </p>
    <h2>
      STRANGE EVENT IN THE LIFE OF SCHALKEN THE PAINTER.
    </h2>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     Being a Seventh Extract from the Legacy of the late Francis
     Purcell, P. P. of Drumcoolagh.
</pre>
    <p>
      You will no doubt be surprised, my dear friend, at the subject of the
      following narrative. What had I to do with Schalken, or Schalken with me?
      He had returned to his native land, and was probably dead and buried,
      before I was born; I never visited Holland nor spoke with a native of that
      country. So much I believe you already know. I must, then, give you my
      authority, and state to you frankly the ground upon which rests the
      credibility of the strange story which I am, about to lay before you.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was acquainted, in my early days, with a Captain Vandael, whose father
      had served King William in the Low Countries, and also in my own unhappy
      land during the Irish campaigns. I know not how it happened that I liked
      this man's society, spite of his politics and religion: but so it was; and
      it was by means of the free intercourse to which our intimacy gave rise
      that I became possessed of the curious tale which you are about to hear.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had often been struck, while visiting Vandael, by a remarkable picture,
      in which, though no connoisseur myself, I could not fail to discern some
      very strong peculiarities, particularly in the distribution of light and
      shade, as also a certain oddity in the design itself, which interested my
      curiosity. It represented the interior of what might be a chamber in some
      antique religious building&mdash;the foreground was occupied by a female
      figure, arrayed in a species of white robe, part of which is arranged so
      as to form a veil. The dress, however, is not strictly that of any
      religious order. In its hand the figure bears a lamp, by whose light alone
      the form and face are illuminated; the features are marked by an arch
      smile, such as pretty women wear when engaged in successfully practising
      some roguish trick; in the background, and, excepting where the dim red
      light of an expiring fire serves to define the form, totally in the shade,
      stands the figure of a man equipped in the old fashion, with doublet and
      so forth, in an attitude of alarm, his hand being placed upon the hilt of
      his sword, which he appears to be in the act of drawing.
    </p>
    <p>
      'There are some pictures,' said I to my friend, 'which impress one, I know
      not how, with a conviction that they represent not the mere ideal shapes
      and combinations which have floated through the imagination of the artist,
      but scenes, faces, and situations which have actually existed. When I look
      upon that picture, something assures me that I behold the representation
      of a reality.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Vandael smiled, and, fixing his eyes upon the painting musingly, he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Your fancy has not deceived you, my good friend, for that picture is the
      record, and I believe a faithful one, of a remarkable and mysterious
      occurrence. It was painted by Schalken, and contains, in the face of the
      female figure, which occupies the most prominent place in the design, an
      accurate portrait of Rose Velderkaust, the niece of Gerard Douw, the first
      and, I believe, the only love of Godfrey Schalken. My father knew the
      painter well, and from Schalken himself he learned the story of the
      mysterious drama, one scene of which the picture has embodied. This
      painting, which is accounted a fine specimen of Schalken's style, was
      bequeathed to my father by the artist's will, and, as you have observed,
      is a very striking and interesting production.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I had only to request Vandael to tell the story of the painting in order
      to be gratified; and thus it is that I am enabled to submit to you a
      faithful recital of what I heard myself, leaving you to reject or to allow
      the evidence upon which the truth of the tradition depends, with this one
      assurance, that Schalken was an honest, blunt Dutchman, and, I believe,
      wholly incapable of committing a flight of imagination; and further, that
      Vandael, from whom I heard the story, appeared firmly convinced of its
      truth.
    </p>
    <p>
      There are few forms upon which the mantle of mystery and romance could
      seem to hang more ungracefully than upon that of the uncouth and clownish
      Schalken&mdash;the Dutch boor&mdash;the rude and dogged, but most cunning
      worker in oils, whose pieces delight the initiated of the present day
      almost as much as his manners disgusted the refined of his own; and yet
      this man, so rude, so dogged, so slovenly, I had almost said so savage, in
      mien and manner, during his after successes, had been selected by the
      capricious goddess, in his early life, to figure as the hero of a romance
      by no means devoid of interest or of mystery.
    </p>
    <p>
      Who can tell how meet he may have been in his young days to play the part
      of the lover or of the hero&mdash;who can say that in early life he had
      been the same harsh, unlicked, and rugged boor that, in his maturer age,
      he proved&mdash;or how far the neglected rudeness which afterwards marked
      his air, and garb, and manners, may not have been the growth of that
      reckless apathy not unfrequently produced by bitter misfortunes and
      disappointments in early life?
    </p>
    <p>
      These questions can never now be answered.
    </p>
    <p>
      We must content ourselves, then, with a plain statement of facts, or what
      have been received and transmitted as such, leaving matters of speculation
      to those who like them.
    </p>
    <p>
      When Schalken studied under the immortal Gerard Douw, he was a young man;
      and in spite of the phlegmatic constitution and unexcitable manner which
      he shared, we believe, with his countrymen, he was not incapable of deep
      and vivid impressions, for it is an established fact that the young
      painter looked with considerable interest upon the beautiful niece of his
      wealthy master.
    </p>
    <p>
      Rose Velderkaust was very young, having, at the period of which we speak,
      not yet attained her seventeenth year, and, if tradition speaks truth,
      possessed all the soft dimpling charms of the fail; light-haired Flemish
      maidens. Schalken had not studied long in the school of Gerard Douw, when
      he felt this interest deepening into something of a keener and intenser
      feeling than was quite consistent with the tranquillity of his honest
      Dutch heart; and at the same time he perceived, or thought he perceived,
      flattering symptoms of a reciprocity of liking, and this was quite
      sufficient to determine whatever indecision he might have heretofore
      experienced, and to lead him to devote exclusively to her every hope and
      feeling of his heart. In short, he was as much in love as a Dutchman could
      be. He was not long in making his passion known to the pretty maiden
      herself, and his declaration was followed by a corresponding confession
      upon her part.
    </p>
    <p>
      Schalken, however, was a poor man, and he possessed no counterbalancing
      advantages of birth or position to induce the old man to consent to a
      union which must involve his niece and ward in the strugglings and
      difficulties of a young and nearly friendless artist. He was, therefore,
      to wait until time had furnished him with opportunity, and accident with
      success; and then, if his labours were found sufficiently lucrative, it
      was to be hoped that his proposals might at least be listened to by her
      jealous guardian. Months passed away, and, cheered by the smiles of the
      little Rose, Schalken's labours were redoubled, and with such effect and
      improvement as reasonably to promise the realisation of his hopes, and no
      contemptible eminence in his art, before many years should have elapsed.
    </p>
    <p>
      The even course of this cheering prosperity was, however, destined to
      experience a sudden and formidable interruption, and that, too, in a
      manner so strange and mysterious as to baffle all investigation, and throw
      upon the events themselves a shadow of almost supernatural horror.
    </p>
    <p>
      Schalken had one evening remained in the master's studio considerably
      longer than his more volatile companions, who had gladly availed
      themselves of the excuse which the dusk of evening afforded, to withdraw
      from their several tasks, in order to finish a day of labour in the
      jollity and conviviality of the tavern.
    </p>
    <p>
      But Schalken worked for improvement, or rather for love. Besides, he was
      now engaged merely in sketching a design, an operation which, unlike that
      of colouring, might be continued as long as there was light sufficient to
      distinguish between canvas and charcoal. He had not then, nor, indeed,
      until long after, discovered the peculiar powers of his pencil, and he was
      engaged in composing a group of extremely roguish-looking and grotesque
      imps and demons, who were inflicting various ingenious torments upon a
      perspiring and pot-bellied St. Anthony, who reclined in the midst of them,
      apparently in the last stage of drunkenness.
    </p>
    <p>
      The young artist, however, though incapable of executing, or even of
      appreciating, anything of true sublimity, had nevertheless discernment
      enough to prevent his being by any means satisfied with his work; and many
      were the patient erasures and corrections which the limbs and features of
      saint and devil underwent, yet all without producing in their new
      arrangement anything of improvement or increased effect.
    </p>
    <p>
      The large, old-fashioned room was silent, and, with the exception of
      himself, quite deserted by its usual inmates. An hour had passed&mdash;nearly
      two&mdash;without any improved result. Daylight had already declined, and
      twilight was fast giving way to the darkness of night. The patience of the
      young man was exhausted, and he stood before his unfinished production,
      absorbed in no very pleasing ruminations, one hand buried in the folds of
      his long dark hair, and the other holding the piece of charcoal which had
      so ill executed its office, and which he now rubbed, without much regard
      to the sable streaks which it produced, with irritable pressure upon his
      ample Flemish inexpressibles.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Pshaw!' said the young man aloud, 'would that picture, devils, saint, and
      all, were where they should be&mdash;in hell!'
    </p>
    <p>
      A short, sudden laugh, uttered startlingly close to his ear, instantly
      responded to the ejaculation.
    </p>
    <p>
      The artist turned sharply round, and now for the first time became aware
      that his labours had been overlooked by a stranger.
    </p>
    <p>
      Within about a yard and a half, and rather behind him, there stood what
      was, or appeared to be, the figure of an elderly man: he wore a short
      cloak, and broad-brimmed hat with a conical crown, and in his hand, which
      was protected with a heavy, gauntlet-shaped glove, he carried a long ebony
      walking-stick, surmounted with what appeared, as it glittered dimly in the
      twilight, to be a massive head of gold, and upon his breast, through the
      folds of the cloak, there shone what appeared to be the links of a rich
      chain of the same metal.
    </p>
    <p>
      The room was so obscure that nothing further of the appearance of the
      figure could be ascertained, and the face was altogether overshadowed by
      the heavy flap of the beaver which overhung it, so that not a feature
      could be discerned. A quantity of dark hair escaped from beneath this
      sombre hat, a circumstance which, connected with the firm, upright
      carriage of the intruder, proved that his years could not yet exceed
      threescore or thereabouts.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was an air of gravity and importance about the garb of this person,
      and something indescribably odd, I might say awful, in the perfect,
      stone-like movelessness of the figure, that effectually checked the testy
      comment which had at once risen to the lips of the irritated artist. He
      therefore, as soon as he had sufficiently recovered the surprise, asked
      the stranger, civilly, to be seated, and desired to know if he had any
      message to leave for his master.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Tell Gerard Douw,' said the unknown, without altering his attitude in the
      smallest degree, 'that Mynher Vanderhauseny of Rotterdam, desires to speak
      with him to-morrow evening at this hour, and, if he please, in this room,
      upon matters of weight&mdash;that is all. Good-night.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The stranger, having finished this message, turned abruptly, and, with a
      quick but silent step, quitted the room, before Schalken had time to say a
      word in reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      The young man felt a curiosity to see in what direction the burgher of
      Rotterdam would turn on quitting the studio, and for that purpose he went
      directly to the window which commanded the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      A lobby of considerable extent intervened between the inner door of the
      painter's room and the street entrance, so that Schalken occupied the post
      of observation before the old man could possibly have reached the street.
    </p>
    <p>
      He watched in vain, however. There was no other mode of exit.
    </p>
    <p>
      Had the old man vanished, or was he lurking about the recesses of the
      lobby for some bad purpose? This last suggestion filled the mind of
      Schalken with a vague horror, which was so unaccountably intense as to
      make him alike afraid to remain in the room alone and reluctant to pass
      through the lobby.
    </p>
    <p>
      However, with an effort which appeared very disproportioned to the
      occasion, he summoned resolution to leave the room, and, having
      double-locked the door and thrust the key in his pocket, without looking
      to the right or left, he traversed the passage which had so recently,
      perhaps still, contained the person of his mysterious visitant, scarcely
      venturing to breathe till he had arrived in the open street.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Mynher Vanderhausen,' said Gerard Douw within himself, as the appointed
      hour approached, 'Mynher Vanderhausen of Rotterdam! I never heard of the
      man till yesterday. What can he want of me? A portrait, perhaps, to be
      painted; or a younger son or a poor relation to be apprenticed; or a
      collection to be valued; or&mdash;pshaw I there's no one in Rotterdam to
      leave me a legacy. Well, whatever the business may be, we shall soon know
      it all.'
    </p>
    <p>
      It was now the close of day, and every easel, except that of Schalken, was
      deserted. Gerard Douw was pacing the apartment with the restless step of
      impatient expectation, every now and then humming a passage from a piece
      of music which he was himself composing; for, though no great proficient,
      he admired the art; sometimes pausing to glance over the work of one of
      his absent pupils, but more frequently placing himself at the window, from
      whence he might observe the passengers who threaded the obscure by-street
      in which his studio was placed.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Said you not, Godfrey,' exclaimed Douw, after a long and fruitless gaze
      from his post of observation, and turning to Schalken&mdash;'said you not
      the hour of appointment was at about seven by the clock of the Stadhouse?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'It had just told seven when I first saw him, sir,' answered the student.
    </p>
    <p>
      'The hour is close at hand, then,' said the master, consulting a horologe
      as large and as round as a full-grown orange. 'Mynher Vanderhausen, from
      Rotterdam&mdash;is it not so?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Such was the name.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'And an elderly man, richly clad?' continued Douw.
    </p>
    <p>
      'As well as I might see,' replied his pupil; 'he could not be young, nor
      yet very old neither, and his dress was rich and grave, as might become a
      citizen of wealth and consideration.'
    </p>
    <p>
      At this moment the sonorous boom of the Stadhouse clock told, stroke after
      stroke, the hour of seven; the eyes of both master and student were
      directed to the door; and it was not until the last peal of the old bell
      had ceased to vibrate, that Douw exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      'So, so; we shall have his worship presently&mdash;that is, if he means to
      keep his hour; if not, thou mayst wait for him, Godfrey, if you court the
      acquaintance of a capricious burgomaster. As for me, I think our old
      Leyden contains a sufficiency of such commodities, without an importation
      from Rotterdam.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Schalken laughed, as in duty bound; and after a pause of some minutes,
      Douw suddenly exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      'What if it should all prove a jest, a piece of mummery got up by Vankarp,
      or some such worthy! I wish you had run all risks, and cudgelled the old
      burgomaster, stadholder, or whatever else he may be, soundly. I would
      wager a dozen of Rhenish, his worship would have pleaded old acquaintance
      before the third application.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Here he comes, sir,' said Schalken, in a low admonitory tone; and
      instantly, upon turning towards the door, Gerard Douw observed the same
      figure which had, on the day before, so unexpectedly greeted the vision of
      his pupil Schalken.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was something in the air and mien of the figure which at once
      satisfied the painter that there was no mummery in the case, and that he
      really stood in the presence of a man of worship; and so, without
      hesitation, he doffed his cap, and courteously saluting the stranger,
      requested him to be seated.
    </p>
    <p>
      The visitor waved his hand slightly, as, if in acknowledgment of the
      courtesy, but remained standing.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I have the honour to see Mynher Vanderhausen, of Rotterdam?' said Gerard
      Douw.
    </p>
    <p>
      'The same,' was the laconic reply of his visitant.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I understand your worship desires to speak with me,' continued Douw, 'and
      I am here by appointment to wait your commands.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Is that a man of trust?' said Vanderhausen, turning towards Schalken, who
      stood at a little distance behind his master.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Certainly,' replied Gerard.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Then let him take this box and get the nearest jeweller or goldsmith to
      value its contents, and let him return hither with a certificate of the
      valuation.'
    </p>
    <p>
      At the same time he placed a small case, about nine inches square, in the
      hands of Gerard Douw, who was as much amazed at its weight as at the
      strange abruptness with which it was handed to him.
    </p>
    <p>
      In accordance with the wishes of the stranger, he delivered it into the
      hands of Schalken, and repeating HIS directions, despatched him upon the
      mission.
    </p>
    <p>
      Schalken disposed his precious charge securely beneath the folds of his
      cloak, and rapidly traversing two or three narrow streets, he stopped at a
      corner house, the lower part of which was then occupied by the shop of a
      Jewish goldsmith.
    </p>
    <p>
      Schalken entered the shop, and calling the little Hebrew into the
      obscurity of its back recesses, he proceeded to lay before him
      Vanderhausen's packet.
    </p>
    <p>
      On being examined by the light of a lamp, it appeared entirely cased with
      lead, the outer surface of which was much scraped and soiled, and nearly
      white with age. This was with difficulty partially removed, and disclosed
      beneath a box of some dark and singularly hard wood; this, too, was
      forced, and after the removal of two or three folds of linen, its contents
      proved to be a mass of golden ingots, close packed, and, as the Jew
      declared, of the most perfect quality.
    </p>
    <p>
      Every ingot underwent the scrutiny of the little Jew, who seemed to feel
      an epicurean delight in touching and testing these morsels of the glorious
      metal; and each one of them was replaced in the box with the exclamation:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Mein Gott, how very perfect! not one grain of alloy&mdash;beautiful,
      beautiful!'
    </p>
    <p>
      The task was at length finished, and the Jew certified under his hand the
      value of the ingots submitted to his examination to amount to many
      thousand rix-dollars.
    </p>
    <p>
      With the desired document in his bosom, and the rich box of gold carefully
      pressed under his arm, and concealed by his cloak, he retraced his way,
      and entering the studio, found his master and the stranger in close
      conference.
    </p>
    <p>
      Schalken had no sooner left the room, in order to execute the commission
      he had taken in charge, than Vanderhausen addressed Gerard Douw in the
      following terms:
    </p>
    <p>
      'I may not tarry with you to-night more than a few minutes, and so I shall
      briefly tell you the matter upon which I come. You visited the town of
      Rotterdam some four months ago, and then I saw in the church of St.
      Lawrence your niece, Rose Velderkaust. I desire to marry her, and if I
      satisfy you as to the fact that I am very wealthy&mdash;more wealthy than
      any husband you could dream of for her&mdash;I expect that you will
      forward my views to the utmost of your authority. If you approve my
      proposal, you must close with it at once, for I cannot command time enough
      to wait for calculations and delays.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Gerard Douw was, perhaps, as much astonished as anyone could be by the
      very unexpected nature of Mynher Vanderhausen's communication; but he did
      not give vent to any unseemly expression of surprise, for besides the
      motives supplied by prudence and politeness, the painter experienced a
      kind of chill and oppressive sensation, something like that which is
      supposed to affect a man who is placed unconsciously in immediate contact
      with something to which he has a natural antipathy&mdash;an undefined
      horror and dread while standing in the presence of the eccentric stranger,
      which made him very unwilling to say anything which might reasonably prove
      offensive.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I have no doubt,' said Gerard, after two or three prefatory hems, 'that
      the connection which you propose would prove alike advantageous and
      honourable to my niece; but you must be aware that she has a will of her
      own, and may not acquiesce in what WE may design for her advantage.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Do not seek to deceive me, Sir Painter,' said Vanderhausen; 'you are her
      guardian&mdash;she is your ward. She is mine if YOU like to make her so.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The man of Rotterdam moved forward a little as he spoke, and Gerard Douw,
      he scarce knew why, inwardly prayed for the speedy return of Schalken.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I desire,' said the mysterious gentleman, 'to place in your hands at once
      an evidence of my wealth, and a security for my liberal dealing with your
      niece. The lad will return in a minute or two with a sum in value five
      times the fortune which she has a right to expect from a husband. This
      shall lie in your hands, together with her dowry, and you may apply the
      united sum as suits her interest best; it shall be all exclusively hers
      while she lives. Is that liberal?'
    </p>
    <p>
      Douw assented, and inwardly thought that fortune had been extraordinarily
      kind to his niece. The stranger, he thought, must be both wealthy and
      generous, and such an offer was not to be despised, though made by a
      humourist, and one of no very prepossessing presence.
    </p>
    <p>
      Rose had no very high pretensions, for she was almost without dowry;
      indeed, altogether so, excepting so far as the deficiency had been
      supplied by the generosity of her uncle. Neither had she any right to
      raise any scruples against the match on the score of birth, for her own
      origin was by no means elevated; and as to other objections, Gerard
      resolved, and, indeed, by the usages of the time was warranted in
      resolving, not to listen to them for a moment.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Sir,' said he, addressing the stranger, 'your offer is most liberal, and
      whatever hesitation I may feel in closing with it immediately, arises
      solely from my not having the honour of knowing anything of your family or
      station. Upon these points you can, of course, satisfy me without
      difficulty?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'As to my respectability,' said the stranger, drily, 'you must take that
      for granted at present; pester me with no inquiries; you can discover
      nothing more about me than I choose to make known. You shall have
      sufficient security for my respectability&mdash;my word, if you are
      honourable: if you are sordid, my gold.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'A testy old gentleman,' thought Douw; 'he must have his own way. But, all
      things considered, I am justified in giving my niece to him. Were she my
      own daughter, I would do the like by her. I will not pledge myself
      unnecessarily, however.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'You will not pledge yourself unnecessarily,' said Vanderhausen, strangely
      uttering the very words which had just floated through the mind of his
      companion; 'but you will do so if it IS necessary, I presume; and I will
      show you that I consider it indispensable. If the gold I mean to leave in
      your hands satisfy you, and if you desire that my proposal shall not be at
      once withdrawn, you must, before I leave this room, write your name to
      this engagement.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Having thus spoken, he placed a paper in the hands of Gerard, the contents
      of which expressed an engagement entered into by Gerard Douw, to give to
      Wilken Vanderhausen, of Rotterdam, in marriage, Rose Velderkaust, and so
      forth, within one week of the date hereof.
    </p>
    <p>
      While the painter was employed in reading this covenant, Schalken, as we
      have stated, entered the studio, and having delivered the box and the
      valuation of the Jew into the hands of the stranger, he was about to
      retire, when Vanderhausen called to him to wait; and, presenting the case
      and the certificate to Gerard Douw, he waited in silence until he had
      satisfied himself by an inspection of both as to the value of the pledge
      left in his hands. At length he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Are you content?'
    </p>
    <p>
      The painter said he would fain have an other day to consider.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Not an hour,' said the suitor, coolly.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, then,' said Douw, 'I am content; it is a bargain.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Then sign at once,' said Vanderhausen; 'I am weary.'
    </p>
    <p>
      At the same time he produced a small case of writing materials, and Gerard
      signed the important document.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Let this youth witness the covenant,' said the old man; and Godfrey
      Schalken unconsciously signed the instrument which bestowed upon another
      that hand which he had so long regarded as the object and reward of all
      his labours.
    </p>
    <p>
      The compact being thus completed, the strange visitor folded up the paper,
      and stowed it safely in an inner pocket.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I will visit you to-morrow night, at nine of the clock, at your house,
      Gerard Douw, and will see the subject of our contract. Farewell.' And so
      saying, Wilken Vanderhausen moved stiffly, but rapidly out of the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      Schalken, eager to resolve his doubts, had placed himself by the window in
      order to watch the street entrance; but the experiment served only to
      support his suspicions, for the old man did not issue from the door. This
      was very strange, very odd, very fearful. He and his master returned
      together, and talked but little on the way, for each had his own subjects
      of reflection, of anxiety, and of hope.
    </p>
    <p>
      Schalken, however, did not know the ruin which threatened his cherished
      schemes.
    </p>
    <p>
      Gerard Douw knew nothing of the attachment which had sprung up between his
      pupil and his niece; and even if he had, it is doubtful whether he would
      have regarded its existence as any serious obstruction to the wishes of
      Mynher Vanderhausen.
    </p>
    <p>
      Marriages were then and there matters of traffic and calculation; and it
      would have appeared as absurd in the eyes of the guardian to make a mutual
      attachment an essential element in a contract of marriage, as it would
      have been to draw up his bonds and receipts in the language of chivalrous
      romance.
    </p>
    <p>
      The painter, however, did not communicate to his niece the important step
      which he had taken in her behalf, and his resolution arose not from any
      anticipation of opposition on her part, but solely from a ludicrous
      consciousness that if his ward were, as she very naturally might do, to
      ask him to describe the appearance of the bridegroom whom he destined for
      her, he would be forced to confess that he had not seen his face, and, if
      called upon, would find it impossible to identify him.
    </p>
    <p>
      Upon the next day, Gerard Douw having dined, called his niece to him, and
      having scanned her person with an air of satisfaction, he took her hand,
      and looking upon her pretty, innocent face with a smile of kindness, he
      said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Rose, my girl, that face of yours will make your fortune.' Rose blushed
      and smiled. 'Such faces and such tempers seldom go together, and, when
      they do, the compound is a love-potion which few heads or hearts can
      resist. Trust me, thou wilt soon be a bride, girl. But this is trifling,
      and I am pressed for time, so make ready the large room by eight o'clock
      to-night, and give directions for supper at nine. I expect a friend
      to-night; and observe me, child, do thou trick thyself out handsomely. I
      would not have him think us poor or sluttish.'
    </p>
    <p>
      With these words he left the chamber, and took his way to the room to
      which we have already had occasion to introduce our readers&mdash;that in
      which his pupils worked.
    </p>
    <p>
      When the evening closed in, Gerard called Schalken, who was about to take
      his departure to his obscure and comfortless lodgings, and asked him to
      come home and sup with Rose and Vanderhausen.
    </p>
    <p>
      The invitation was of course accepted, and Gerard Douw and his pupil soon
      found themselves in the handsome and somewhat antique-looking room which
      had been prepared for the reception of the stranger.
    </p>
    <p>
      A cheerful wood-fire blazed in the capacious hearth; a little at one side
      an oldfashioned table, with richly-carved legs, was placed&mdash;destined,
      no doubt, to receive the supper, for which preparations were going
      forward; and ranged with exact regularity, stood the tall-backed chairs,
      whose ungracefulness was more than counterbalanced by their comfort.
    </p>
    <p>
      The little party, consisting of Rose, her uncle, and the artist, awaited
      the arrival of the expected visitor with considerable impatience.
    </p>
    <p>
      Nine o'clock at length came, and with it a summons at the street-door,
      which, being speedily answered, was followed by a slow and emphatic tread
      upon the staircase; the steps moved heavily across the lobby, the door of
      the room in which the party which we have described were assembled slowly
      opened, and there entered a figure which startled, almost appalled, the
      phlegmatic Dutchmen, and nearly made Rose scream with affright; it was the
      form, and arrayed in the garb, of Mynher Vanderhausen; the air, the gait,
      the height was the same, but the features had never been seen by any of
      the party before.
    </p>
    <p>
      The stranger stopped at the door of the room, and displayed his form and
      face completely. He wore a dark-coloured cloth cloak, which was short and
      full, not falling quite to the knees; his legs were cased in dark purple
      silk stockings, and his shoes were adorned with roses of the same colour.
      The opening of the cloak in front showed the under-suit to consist of some
      very dark, perhaps sable material, and his hands were enclosed in a pair
      of heavy leather gloves which ran up considerably above the wrist, in the
      manner of a gauntlet. In one hand he carried his walking-stick and his
      hat, which he had removed, and the other hung heavily by his side. A
      quantity of grizzled hair descended in long tresses from his head, and its
      folds rested upon the plaits of a stiff ruff, which effectually concealed
      his neck.
    </p>
    <p>
      So far all was well; but the face!&mdash;all the flesh of the face was
      coloured with the bluish leaden hue which is sometimes produced by the
      operation of metallic medicines administered in excessive quantities; the
      eyes were enormous, and the white appeared both above and below the iris,
      which gave to them an expression of insanity, which was heightened by
      their glassy fixedness; the nose was well enough, but the mouth was
      writhed considerably to one side, where it opened in order to give egress
      to two long, discoloured fangs, which projected from the upper jaw, far
      below the lower lip; the hue of the lips themselves bore the usual
      relation to that of the face, and was consequently nearly black. The
      character of the face was malignant, even satanic, to the last degree;
      and, indeed, such a combination of horror could hardly be accounted for,
      except by supposing the corpse of some atrocious malefactor, which had
      long hung blackening upon the gibbet, to have at length become the
      habitation of a demon&mdash;the frightful sport of Satanic possession.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was remarkable that the worshipful stranger suffered as little as
      possible of his flesh to appear, and that during his visit he did not once
      remove his gloves.
    </p>
    <p>
      Having stood for some moments at the door, Gerard Douw at length found
      breath and collectedness to bid him welcome, and, with a mute inclination
      of the head, the stranger stepped forward into the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was something indescribably odd, even horrible, about all his
      motions, something undefinable, that was unnatural, unhuman&mdash;it was
      as if the limbs were guided and directed by a spirit unused to the
      management of bodily machinery.
    </p>
    <p>
      The stranger said hardly anything during his visit, which did not exceed
      half an hour; and the host himself could scarcely muster courage enough to
      utter the few necessary salutations and courtesies: and, indeed, such was
      the nervous terror which the presence of Vanderhausen inspired, that very
      little would have made all his entertainers fly bellowing from the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      They had not so far lost all self-possession, however, as to fail to
      observe two strange peculiarities of their visitor.
    </p>
    <p>
      During his stay he did not once suffer his eyelids to close, nor even to
      move in the slightest degree; and further, there was a death-like
      stillness in his whole person, owing to the total absence of the heaving
      motion of the chest, caused by the process of respiration.
    </p>
    <p>
      These two peculiarities, though when told they may appear trifling,
      produced a very striking and unpleasant effect when seen and observed.
      Vanderhausen at length relieved the painter of Leyden of his inauspicious
      presence; and with no small gratification the little party heard the
      street-door close after him.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Dear uncle,' said Rose, 'what a frightful man! I would not see him again
      for the wealth of the States!'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Tush, foolish girl!' said Douw, whose sensations were anything but
      comfortable. 'A man may be as ugly as the devil, and yet if his heart and
      actions are good, he is worth all the pretty-faced, perfumed puppies that
      walk the Mall. Rose, my girl, it is very true he has not thy pretty face,
      but I know him to be wealthy and liberal; and were he ten times more ugly&mdash;&mdash;'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Which is inconceivable,' observed Rose.
    </p>
    <p>
      'These two virtues would be sufficient,' continued her uncle, 'to
      counterbalance all his deformity; and if not of power sufficient actually
      to alter the shape of the features, at least of efficacy enough to prevent
      one thinking them amiss.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Do you know, uncle,' said Rose, 'when I saw him standing at the door, I
      could not get it out of my head that I saw the old, painted, wooden figure
      that used to frighten me so much in the church of St. Laurence of
      Rotterdam.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Gerard laughed, though he could not help inwardly acknowledging the
      justness of the comparison. He was resolved, however, as far as he could,
      to check his niece's inclination to ridicule the ugliness of her intended
      bridegroom, although he was not a little pleased to observe that she
      appeared totally exempt from that mysterious dread of the stranger which,
      he could not disguise it from himself, considerably affected him, as also
      his pupil Godfrey Schalken.
    </p>
    <p>
      Early on the next day there arrived, from various quarters of the town,
      rich presents of silks, velvets, jewellery, and so forth, for Rose; and
      also a packet directed to Gerard Douw, which, on being opened, was found
      to contain a contract of marriage, formally drawn up, between Wilken
      Vanderhausen of the Boom-quay, in Rotterdam, and Rose Velderkaust of
      Leyden, niece to Gerard Douw, master in the art of painting, also of the
      same city; and containing engagements on the part of Vanderhausen to make
      settlements upon his bride, far more splendid than he had before led her
      guardian to believe likely, and which were to be secured to her use in the
      most unexceptionable manner possible&mdash;the money being placed in the
      hands of Gerard Douw himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      I have no sentimental scenes to describe, no cruelty of guardians, or
      magnanimity of wards, or agonies of lovers. The record I have to make is
      one of sordidness, levity, and interest. In less than a week after the
      first interview which we have just described, the contract of marriage was
      fulfilled, and Schalken saw the prize which he would have risked anything
      to secure, carried off triumphantly by his formidable rival.
    </p>
    <p>
      For two or three days he absented himself from the school; he then
      returned and worked, if with less cheerfulness, with far more dogged
      resolution than before; the dream of love had given place to that of
      ambition.
    </p>
    <p>
      Months passed away, and, contrary to his expectation, and, indeed, to the
      direct promise of the parties, Gerard Douw heard nothing of his niece, or
      her worshipful spouse. The interest of the money, which was to have been
      demanded in quarterly sums, lay unclaimed in his hands. He began to grow
      extremely uneasy.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mynher Vanderhausen's direction in Rotterdam he was fully possessed of.
      After some irresolution he finally determined to journey thither&mdash;a
      trifling undertaking, and easily accomplished&mdash;and thus to satisfy
      himself of the safety and comfort of his ward, for whom he entertained an
      honest and strong affection.
    </p>
    <p>
      His search was in vain, however. No one in Rotterdam had ever heard of
      Mynher Vanderhausen.
    </p>
    <p>
      Gerard Douw left not a house in the Boom-quay untried; but all in vain. No
      one could give him any information whatever touching the object of his
      inquiry; and he was obliged to return to Leyden, nothing wiser than when
      he had left it.
    </p>
    <p>
      On his arrival he hastened to the establishment from which Vanderhausen
      had hired the lumbering though, considering the times, most luxurious
      vehicle which the bridal party had employed to convey them to Rotterdam.
      From the driver of this machine he learned, that having proceeded by slow
      stages, they had late in the evening approached Rotterdam; but that before
      they entered the city, and while yet nearly a mile from it, a small party
      of men, soberly clad, and after the old fashion, with peaked beards and
      moustaches, standing in the centre of the road, obstructed the further
      progress of the carriage. The driver reined in his horses, much fearing,
      from the obscurity of the hour, and the loneliness of the road, that some
      mischief was intended.
    </p>
    <p>
      His fears were, however, somewhat allayed by his observing that these
      strange men carried a large litter, of an antique shape, and which they
      immediately set down upon the pavement, whereupon the bridegroom, having
      opened the coach-door from within, descended, and having assisted his
      bride to do likewise, led her, weeping bitterly and wringing her hands, to
      the litter, which they both entered. It was then raised by the men who
      surrounded it, and speedily carried towards the city, and before it had
      proceeded many yards the darkness concealed it from the view of the Dutch
      charioteer.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the inside of the vehicle he found a purse, whose contents more than
      thrice paid the hire of the carriage and man. He saw and could tell
      nothing more of Mynher Vanderhausen and his beautiful lady. This mystery
      was a source of deep anxiety and almost of grief to Gerard Douw.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was evidently fraud in the dealing of Vanderhausen with him, though
      for what purpose committed he could not imagine. He greatly doubted how
      far it was possible for a man possessing in his countenance so strong an
      evidence of the presence of the most demoniac feelings, to be in reality
      anything but a villain; and every day that passed without his hearing from
      or of his niece, instead of inducing him to forget his fears, on the
      contrary tended more and more to exasperate them.
    </p>
    <p>
      The loss of his niece's cheerful society tended also to depress his
      spirits; and in order to dispel this despondency, which often crept upon
      his mind after his daily employment was over, he was wont frequently to
      prevail upon Schalken to accompany him home, and by his presence to
      dispel, in some degree, the gloom of his otherwise solitary supper.
    </p>
    <p>
      One evening, the painter and his pupil were sitting by the fire, having
      accomplished a comfortable supper, and had yielded to that silent
      pensiveness sometimes induced by the process of digestion, when their
      reflections were disturbed by a loud sound at the street-door, as if
      occasioned by some person rushing forcibly and repeatedly against it. A
      domestic had run without delay to ascertain the cause of the disturbance,
      and they heard him twice or thrice interrogate the applicant for
      admission, but without producing an answer or any cessation of the sounds.
    </p>
    <p>
      They heard him then open the hall-door, and immediately there followed a
      light and rapid tread upon the staircase. Schalken laid his hand on his
      sword, and advanced towards the door. It opened before he reached it, and
      Rose rushed into the room. She looked wild and haggard, and pale with
      exhaustion and terror; but her dress surprised them as much even as her
      unexpected appearance. It consisted of a kind of white woollen wrapper,
      made close about the neck, and descending to the very ground. It was much
      deranged and travel-soiled. The poor creature had hardly entered the
      chamber when she fell senseless on the floor. With some difficulty they
      succeeded in reviving her, and on recovering her senses she instantly
      exclaimed, in a tone of eager, terrified impatience:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Wine, wine, quickly, or I'm lost!'
    </p>
    <p>
      Much alarmed at the strange agitation in which the call was made, they at
      once administered to her wishes, and she drank some wine with a haste and
      eagerness which surprised them. She had hardly swallowed it, when she
      exclaimed, with the same urgency:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Food, food, at once, or I perish!'
    </p>
    <p>
      A considerable fragment of a roast joint was upon the table, and Schalken
      immediately proceeded to cut some, but he was anticipated; for no sooner
      had she become aware of its presence than she darted at it with the
      rapacity of a vulture, and, seizing it in her hands she tore off the flesh
      with her teeth and swallowed it.
    </p>
    <p>
      When the paroxysm of hunger had been a little appeased, she appeared
      suddenly to become aware how strange her conduct had been, or it may have
      been that other more agitating thoughts recurred to her mind, for she
      began to weep bitterly and to wring her hands.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh! send for a minister of God,' said she; 'I am not safe till he comes;
      send for him speedily.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Gerard Douw despatched a messenger instantly, and prevailed on his niece
      to allow him to surrender his bedchamber to her use; he also persuaded her
      to retire to it at once and to rest; her consent was extorted upon the
      condition that they would not leave her for a moment.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh that the holy man were here!' she said; 'he can deliver me. The dead
      and the living can never be one&mdash;God has forbidden it.'
    </p>
    <p>
      With these mysterious words she surrendered herself to their guidance, and
      they proceeded to the chamber which Gerard Douw had assigned to her use.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Do not&mdash;do not leave me for a moment,' said she. 'I am lost for ever
      if you do.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Gerard Douw's chamber was approached through a spacious apartment, which
      they were now about to enter. Gerard Douw and Schalken each carried a was
      candle, so that a sufficient degree of light was cast upon all surrounding
      objects. They were now entering the large chamber, which, as I have said,
      communicated with Douw's apartment, when Rose suddenly stopped, and, in a
      whisper which seemed to thrill with horror, she said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'O God! he is here&mdash;he is here! See, see&mdash;there he goes!'
    </p>
    <p>
      She pointed towards the door of the inner room, and Schalken thought he
      saw a shadowy and ill-defined form gliding into that apartment. He drew
      his sword, and raising the candle so as to throw its light with increased
      distinctness upon the objects in the room, he entered the chamber into
      which the shadow had glided. No figure was there&mdash;nothing but the
      furniture which belonged to the room, and yet he could not be deceived as
      to the fact that something had moved before them into the chamber.
    </p>
    <p>
      A sickening dread came upon him, and the cold perspiration broke out in
      heavy drops upon his forehead; nor was he more composed when he heard the
      increased urgency, the agony of entreaty, with which Rose implored them
      not to leave her for a moment.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I saw him,' said she. 'He's here! I cannot be deceived&mdash;I know him.
      He's by me&mdash;he's with me&mdash;he's in the room. Then, for God's
      sake, as you would save, do not stir from beside me!'
    </p>
    <p>
      They at length prevailed upon her to lie down upon the bed, where she
      continued to urge them to stay by her. She frequently uttered incoherent
      sentences, repeating again and again, 'The dead and the living cannot be
      one&mdash;God has forbidden it!' and then again, 'Rest to the wakeful&mdash;sleep
      to the sleep-walkers.'
    </p>
    <p>
      These and such mysterious and broken sentences she continued to utter
      until the clergyman arrived.
    </p>
    <p>
      Gerard Douw began to fear, naturally enough, that the poor girl, owing to
      terror or ill-treatment, had become deranged; and he half suspected, by
      the suddenness of her appearance, and the unseasonableness of the hour,
      and, above all, from the wildness and terror of her manner, that she had
      made her escape from some place of confinement for lunatics, and was in
      immediate fear of pursuit. He resolved to summon medical advice as soon as
      the mind of his niece had been in some measure set at rest by the offices
      of the clergyman whose attendance she had so earnestly desired; and until
      this object had been attained, he did not venture to put any questions to
      her, which might possibly, by reviving painful or horrible recollections,
      increase her agitation.
    </p>
    <p>
      The clergyman soon arrived&mdash;a man of ascetic countenance and
      venerable age&mdash;one whom Gerard Douw respected much, forasmuch as he
      was a veteran polemic, though one, perhaps, more dreaded as a combatant
      than beloved as a Christian&mdash;of pure morality, subtle brain, and
      frozen heart. He entered the chamber which communicated with that in which
      Rose reclined, and immediately on his arrival she requested him to pray
      for her, as for one who lay in the hands of Satan, and who could hope for
      deliverance&mdash;only from heaven.
    </p>
    <p>
      That our readers may distinctly understand all the circumstances of the
      event which we are about imperfectly to describe, it is necessary to state
      the relative position of the parties who were engaged in it. The old
      clergyman and Schalken were in the anteroom of which we have already
      spoken; Rose lay in the inner chamber, the door of which was open; and by
      the side of the bed, at her urgent desire, stood her guardian; a candle
      burned in the bedchamber, and three were lighted in the outer apartment.
    </p>
    <p>
      The old man now cleared his voice, as if about to commence; but before he
      had time to begin, a sudden gust of air blew out the candle which served
      to illuminate the room in which the poor girl lay, and she, with hurried
      alarm, exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Godfrey, bring in another candle; the darkness is unsafe.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Gerard Douw, forgetting for the moment her repeated injunctions in the
      immediate impulse, stepped from the bedchamber into the other, in order to
      supply what she desired.
    </p>
    <p>
      'O God I do not go, dear uncle!' shrieked the unhappy girl; and at the
      same time she sprang from the bed and darted after him, in order, by her
      grasp, to detain him.
    </p>
    <p>
      But the warning came too late, for scarcely had he passed the threshold,
      and hardly had his niece had time to utter the startling exclamation, when
      the door which divided the two rooms closed violently after him, as if
      swung to by a strong blast of wind.
    </p>
    <p>
      Schalken and he both rushed to the door, but their united and desperate
      efforts could not avail so much as to shake it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Shriek after shriek burst from the inner chamber, with all the piercing
      loudness of despairing terror. Schalken and Douw applied every energy and
      strained every nerve to force open the door; but all in vain.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was no sound of struggling from within, but the screams seemed to
      increase in loudness, and at the same time they heard the bolts of the
      latticed window withdrawn, and the window itself grated upon the sill as
      if thrown open.
    </p>
    <p>
      One LAST shriek, so long and piercing and agonised as to be scarcely
      human, swelled from the room, and suddenly there followed a death-like
      silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      A light step was heard crossing the floor, as if from the bed to the
      window; and almost at the same instant the door gave way, and, yielding to
      the pressure of the external applicants, they were nearly precipitated
      into the room. It was empty. The window was open, and Schalken sprang to a
      chair and gazed out upon the street and canal below. He saw no form, but
      he beheld, or thought he beheld, the waters of the broad canal beneath
      settling ring after ring in heavy circular ripples, as if a moment before
      disturbed by the immersion of some large and heavy mass.
    </p>
    <p>
      No trace of Rose was ever after discovered, nor was anything certain
      respecting her mysterious wooer detected or even suspected; no clue
      whereby to trace the intricacies of the labyrinth and to arrive at a
      distinct conclusion was to be found. But an incident occurred, which,
      though it will not be received by our rational readers as at all
      approaching to evidence upon the matter, nevertheless produced a strong
      and a lasting impression upon the mind of Schalken.
    </p>
    <p>
      Many years after the events which we have detailed, Schalken, then
      remotely situated, received an intimation of his father's death, and of
      his intended burial upon a fixed day in the church of Rotterdam. It was
      necessary that a very considerable journey should be performed by the
      funeral procession, which, as it will readily be believed, was not very
      numerously attended. Schalken with difficulty arrived in Rotterdam late in
      the day upon which the funeral was appointed to take place. The procession
      had not then arrived. Evening closed in, and still it did not appear.
    </p>
    <p>
      Schalken strolled down to the church&mdash;he found it open&mdash;notice
      of the arrival of the funeral had been given, and the vault in which the
      body was to be laid had been opened. The official who corresponds to our
      sexton, on seeing a well-dressed gentleman, whose object was to attend the
      expected funeral, pacing the aisle of the church, hospitably invited him
      to share with him the comforts of a blazing wood fire, which, as was his
      custom in winter time upon such occasions, he had kindled on the hearth of
      a chamber which communicated, by a flight of steps, with the vault below.
    </p>
    <p>
      In this chamber Schalken and his entertainer seated themselves, and the
      sexton, after some fruitless attempts to engage his guest in conversation,
      was obliged to apply himself to his tobacco-pipe and can to solace his
      solitude.
    </p>
    <p>
      In spite of his grief and cares, the fatigues of a rapid journey of nearly
      forty hours gradually overcame the mind and body of Godfrey Schalken, and
      he sank into a deep sleep, from which he was awakened by some one shaking
      him gently by the shoulder. He first thought that the old sexton had
      called him, but HE was no longer in the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      He roused himself, and as soon as he could clearly see what was around
      him, he perceived a female form, clothed in a kind of light robe of
      muslin, part of which was so disposed as to act as a veil, and in her hand
      she carried a lamp. She was moving rather away from him, and towards the
      flight of steps which conducted towards the vaults.
    </p>
    <p>
      Schalken felt a vague alarm at the sight of this figure, and at the same
      time an irresistible impulse to follow its guidance. He followed it
      towards the vaults, but when it reached the head of the stairs, he paused;
      the figure paused also, and, turning gently round, displayed, by the light
      of the lamp it carried, the face and features of his first love, Rose
      Velderkaust. There was nothing horrible, or even sad, in the countenance.
      On the contrary, it wore the same arch smile which used to enchant the
      artist long before in his happy days.
    </p>
    <p>
      A feeling of awe and of interest, too intense to be resisted, prompted him
      to follow the spectre, if spectre it were. She descended the stairs&mdash;he
      followed; and, turning to the left, through a narrow passage, she led him,
      to his infinite surprise, into what appeared to be an oldfashioned Dutch
      apartment, such as the pictures of Gerard Douw have served to immortalise.
    </p>
    <p>
      Abundance of costly antique furniture was disposed about the room, and in
      one corner stood a four-post bed, with heavy black-cloth curtains around
      it; the figure frequently turned towards him with the same arch smile; and
      when she came to the side of the bed, she drew the curtains, and by the
      light of the lamp which she held towards its contents, she disclosed to
      the horror-stricken painter, sitting bolt upright in the bed, the livid
      and demoniac form of Vanderhausen. Schalken had hardly seen him when he
      fell senseless upon the floor, where he lay until discovered, on the next
      morning, by persons employed in closing the passages into the vaults. He
      was lying in a cell of considerable size, which had not been disturbed for
      a long time, and he had fallen beside a large coffin which was supported
      upon small stone pillars, a security against the attacks of vermin.
    </p>
    <p>
      To his dying day Schalken was satisfied of the reality of the vision which
      he had witnessed, and he has left behind him a curious evidence of the
      impression which it wrought upon his fancy, in a painting executed shortly
      after the event we have narrated, and which is valuable as exhibiting not
      only the peculiarities which have made Schalken's pictures sought after,
      but even more so as presenting a portrait, as close and faithful as one
      taken from memory can be, of his early love, Rose Velderkaust, whose
      mysterious fate must ever remain matter of speculation.
    </p>
    <p>
      The picture represents a chamber of antique masonry, such as might be
      found in most old cathedrals, and is lighted faintly by a lamp carried in
      the hand of a female figure, such as we have above attempted to describe;
      and in the background, and to the left of him who examines the painting,
      there stands the form of a man apparently aroused from sleep, and by his
      attitude, his hand being laid upon his sword, exhibiting considerable
      alarm: this last figure is illuminated only by the expiring glare of a
      wood or charcoal fire.
    </p>
    <p>
      The whole production exhibits a beautiful specimen of that artful and
      singular distribution of light and shade which has rendered the name of
      Schalken immortal among the artists of his country. This tale is
      traditionary, and the reader will easily perceive, by our studiously
      omitting to heighten many points of the narrative, when a little
      additional colouring might have added effect to the recital, that we have
      desired to lay before him, not a figment of the brain, but a curious
      tradition connected with, and belonging to, the biography of a famous
      artist.
    </p>
    <h2>
      SCRAPS OF HIBERNIAN BALLADS.
    </h2>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     Being an Eighth Extract from the Legacy of the late Francis
     Purcell, P. P. of Drumcoolagh.
</pre>
    <p>
      I have observed, my dear friend, among other grievous misconceptions
      current among men otherwise well-informed, and which tend to degrade the
      pretensions of my native land, an impression that there exists no such
      thing as indigenous modern Irish composition deserving the name of poetry&mdash;a
      belief which has been thoughtlessly sustained and confirmed by the
      unconscionable literary perverseness of Irishmen themselves, who have
      preferred the easy task of concocting humorous extravaganzas, which
      caricature with merciless exaggeration the pedantry, bombast, and blunders
      incident to the lowest order of Hibernian ballads, to the more pleasurable
      and patriotic duty of collecting together the many, many specimens of
      genuine poetic feeling, which have grown up, like its wild flowers, from
      the warm though neglected soil of Ireland.
    </p>
    <p>
      In fact, the productions which have long been regarded as pure samples of
      Irish poetic composition, such as 'The Groves of Blarney,' and 'The
      Wedding of Ballyporeen,' 'Ally Croker,' etc., etc., are altogether
      spurious, and as much like the thing they call themselves 'as I to
      Hercules.'
    </p>
    <p>
      There are to be sure in Ireland, as in all countries, poems which deserve
      to be laughed at. The native productions of which I speak, frequently
      abound in absurdities&mdash;absurdities which are often, too, provokingly
      mixed up with what is beautiful; but I strongly and absolutely deny that
      the prevailing or even the usual character of Irish poetry is that of
      comicality. No country, no time, is devoid of real poetry, or something
      approaching to it; and surely it were a strange thing if Ireland,
      abounding as she does from shore to shore with all that is beautiful, and
      grand, and savage in scenery, and filled with wild recollections, vivid
      passions, warm affections, and keen sorrow, could find no language to
      speak withal, but that of mummery and jest. No, her language is imperfect,
      but there is strength in its rudeness, and beauty in its wildness; and,
      above all, strong feeling flows through it, like fresh fountains in rugged
      caverns.
    </p>
    <p>
      And yet I will not say that the language of genuine indigenous Irish
      composition is always vulgar and uncouth: on the contrary, I am in
      possession of some specimens, though by no means of the highest order as
      to poetic merit, which do not possess throughout a single peculiarity of
      diction. The lines which I now proceed to lay before you, by way of
      illustration, are from the pen of an unfortunate young man, of very humble
      birth, whose early hopes were crossed by the untimely death of her whom he
      loved. He was a self-educated man, and in after-life rose to high
      distinctions in the Church to which he devoted himself&mdash;an act which
      proves the sincerity of spirit with which these verses were written.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
 'When moonlight falls on wave and wimple,
 And silvers every circling dimple,
     That onward, onward sails:
 When fragrant hawthorns wild and simple
     Lend perfume to the gales,
 And the pale moon in heaven abiding,
 O'er midnight mists and mountains riding,
 Shines on the river, smoothly gliding
     Through quiet dales,

 'I wander there in solitude,
 Charmed by the chiming music rude
     Of streams that fret and flow.
 For by that eddying stream SHE stood,
     On such a night I trow:
 For HER the thorn its breath was lending,
 On this same tide HER eye was bending,
 And with its voice HER voice was blending
     Long, long ago.

 Wild stream! I walk by thee once more,
 I see thy hawthorns dim and hoar,
     I hear thy waters moan,
 And night-winds sigh from shore to shore,
     With hushed and hollow tone;
 But breezes on their light way winging,
 And all thy waters heedless singing,
 No more to me are gladness bringing&mdash;
     I am alone.

 'Years after years, their swift way keeping,
 Like sere leaves down thy current sweeping,
     Are lost for aye, and sped&mdash;
 And Death the wintry soil is heaping
     As fast as flowers are shed.
 And she who wandered by my side,
 And breathed enchantment o'er thy tide,
 That makes thee still my friend and guide&mdash;
     And she is dead.'
</pre>
    <p>
      These lines I have transcribed in order to prove a point which I have
      heard denied, namely, that an Irish peasant&mdash;for their author was no
      more&mdash;may write at least correctly in the matter of measure,
      language, and rhyme; and I shall add several extracts in further
      illustration of the same fact, a fact whose assertion, it must be allowed,
      may appear somewhat paradoxical even to those who are acquainted, though
      superficially, with Hibernian composition. The rhymes are, it must be
      granted, in the generality of such productions, very latitudinarian
      indeed, and as a veteran votary of the muse once assured me, depend wholly
      upon the wowls (vowels), as may be seen in the following stanza of the
      famous 'Shanavan Voicth.'
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
 '"What'll we have for supper?"
     Says my Shanavan Voicth;
 "We'll have turkeys and roast BEEF,
 And we'll eat it very SWEET,
 And then we'll take a SLEEP,"
     Says my Shanavan Voicth.'
</pre>
    <p>
      But I am desirous of showing you that, although barbarisms may and do
      exist in our native ballads, there are still to be found exceptions which
      furnish examples of strict correctness in rhyme and metre. Whether they be
      one whit the better for this I have my doubts. In order to establish my
      position, I subjoin a portion of a ballad by one Michael Finley, of whom
      more anon. The GENTLEMAN spoken of in the song is Lord Edward Fitzgerald.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
 'The day that traitors sould him and inimies bought him,
     The day that the red gold and red blood was paid&mdash;
 Then the green turned pale and thrembled like the dead leaves in
Autumn,     And the heart an' hope iv Ireland in the could grave was
laid.

 'The day I saw you first, with the sunshine fallin' round ye,
     My heart fairly opened with the grandeur of the view:
 For ten thousand Irish boys that day did surround ye,
     An' I swore to stand by them till death, an' fight for you.

 'Ye wor the bravest gentleman, an' the best that ever stood,
     And your eyelid never thrembled for danger nor for dread,
 An' nobleness was flowin' in each stream of your blood&mdash;
     My bleasing on you night au' day, an' Glory be your bed.

 'My black an' bitter curse on the head, an' heart, an' hand,
     That plotted, wished, an' worked the fall of this Irish hero
bold;     God's curse upon the Irishman that sould his native land,
 An' hell consume to dust the hand that held the thraitor's
gold.'
</pre>
    <p>
      Such were the politics and poetry of Michael Finley, in his day, perhaps,
      the most noted song-maker of his country; but as genius is never without
      its eccentricities, Finley had his peculiarities, and among these, perhaps
      the most amusing was his rooted aversion to pen, ink, and paper, in
      perfect independence of which, all his compositions were completed. It is
      impossible to describe the jealousy with which he regarded the presence of
      writing materials of any kind, and his ever wakeful fears lest some
      literary pirate should transfer his oral poetry to paper&mdash;fears which
      were not altogether without warrant, inasmuch as the recitation and
      singing of these original pieces were to him a source of wealth and
      importance. I recollect upon one occasion his detecting me in the very act
      of following his recitation with my pencil and I shall not soon forget his
      indignant scowl, as stopping abruptly in the midst of a line, he sharply
      exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Is my pome a pigsty, or what, that you want a surveyor's ground-plan of
      it?'
    </p>
    <p>
      Owing to this absurd scruple, I have been obliged, with one exception,
      that of the ballad of 'Phaudhrig Crohoore,' to rest satisfied with such
      snatches and fragments of his poetry as my memory could bear away&mdash;a
      fact which must account for the mutilated state in which I have been
      obliged to present the foregoing specimen of his composition.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was in vain for me to reason with this man of metres upon the
      unreasonableness of this despotic and exclusive assertion of copyright. I
      well remember his answer to me when, among other arguments, I urged the
      advisability of some care for the permanence of his reputation, as a
      motive to induce him to consent to have his poems written down, and thus
      reduced to a palpable and enduring form.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I often noticed,' said he, 'when a mist id be spreadin', a little brier
      to look as big, you'd think, as an oak tree; an' same way, in the dimmness
      iv the nightfall, I often seen a man tremblin' and crassin' himself as if
      a sperit was before him, at the sight iv a small thorn bush, that he'd
      leap over with ase if the daylight and sunshine was in it. An' that's the
      rason why I think it id be better for the likes iv me to be remimbered in
      tradition than to be written in history.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Finley has now been dead nearly eleven years, and his fame has not
      prospered by the tactics which he pursued, for his reputation, so far from
      being magnified, has been wholly obliterated by the mists of obscurity.
    </p>
    <p>
      With no small difficulty, and no inconsiderable manoeuvring, I succeeded
      in procuring, at an expense of trouble and conscience which you will no
      doubt think but poorly rewarded, an accurate 'report' of one of his most
      popular recitations. It celebrates one of the many daring exploits of the
      once famous Phaudhrig Crohoore (in prosaic English, Patrick Connor). I
      have witnessed powerful effects produced upon large assemblies by Finley's
      recitation of this poem which he was wont, upon pressing invitation, to
      deliver at weddings, wakes, and the like; of course the power of the
      narrative was greatly enhanced by the fact that many of his auditors had
      seen and well knew the chief actors in the drama.
    </p>
    <p>
      'PHAUDHRIG CROHOORE.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
 Oh, Phaudhrig Crohoore was the broth of a boy,
     And he stood six foot eight,
 And his arm was as round as another man's thigh,
     'Tis Phaudhrig was great,&mdash;
 And his hair was as black as the shadows of night,
 And hung over the scars left by many a fight;
 And his voice, like the thunder, was deep, strong, and loud,
 And his eye like the lightnin' from under the cloud.
 And all the girls liked him, for he could spake civil,
 And sweet when he chose it, for he was the divil.
 An' there wasn't a girl from thirty-five undher,
 Divil a matter how crass, but he could come round her.
 But of all the sweet girls that smiled on him, but one
 Was the girl of his heart, an' he loved her alone.
 An' warm as the sun, as the rock firm an' sure,
 Was the love of the heart of Phaudhrig Crohoore;
 An' he'd die for one smile from his Kathleen O'Brien,
 For his love, like his hatred, was sthrong as the lion.

 'But Michael O'Hanlon loved Kathleen as well
 As he hated Crohoore&mdash;an' that same was like hell.
 But O'Brien liked HIM, for they were the same parties,
 The O'Briens, O'Hanlons, an' Murphys, and Cartys&mdash;
 An' they all went together an' hated Crohoore,
 For it's many the batin' he gave them before;
 An' O'Hanlon made up to O'Brien, an' says he:
 "I'll marry your daughter, if you'll give her to me."
 And the match was made up, an' when Shrovetide came on,
 The company assimbled three hundred if one:
 There was all the O'Hanlons, an' Murphys, an' Cartys,
 An' the young boys an' girls av all o' them parties;
 An' the O'Briens, av coorse, gathered strong on day,
 An' the pipers an' fiddlers were tearin' away;
 There was roarin', an' jumpin', an' jiggin', an' flingin',
 An' jokin', an' blessin', an' kissin', an' singin',
 An' they wor all laughin'&mdash;why not, to be sure?&mdash;
 How O'Hanlon came inside of Phaudhrig Crohoore.
 An' they all talked an' laughed the length of the table,
 Atin' an' dhrinkin' all while they wor able,
 And with pipin' an' fiddlin' an' roarin' like tundher,
 Your head you'd think fairly was splittin' asundher;
 And the priest called out, "Silence, ye blackguards, agin!"
 An' he took up his prayer-book, just goin' to begin,
 An' they all held their tongues from their funnin' and bawlin',
 So silent you'd notice the smallest pin fallin';

 An' the priest was just beg'nin' to read, whin the door
 Sprung back to the wall, and in walked Crohoore&mdash;
 Oh! Phaudhrig Crohoore was the broth of a boy,
 Ant he stood six foot eight,
 An' his arm was as round as another man's thigh,
 'Tis Phaudhrig was great&mdash;
 An' he walked slowly up, watched by many a bright eye,
 As a black cloud moves on through the stars of the sky,
 An' none sthrove to stop him, for Phaudhrig was great,
 Till he stood all alone, just apposit the sate
 Where O'Hanlon and Kathleen, his beautiful bride,
 Were sitting so illigant out side by side;
 An' he gave her one look that her heart almost broke,
 An' he turned to O'Brien, her father, and spoke,
 An' his voice, like the thunder, was deep, sthrong, and loud,
 An' his eye shone like lightnin' from under the cloud:
 "I didn't come here like a tame, crawlin' mouse,
 But I stand like a man in my inimy's house;
 In the field, on the road, Phaudhrig never knew fear,
 Of his foemen, an' God knows he scorns it here;

 So lave me at aise, for three minutes or four,
 To spake to the girl I'll never see more."
 An' to Kathleen he turned, and his voice changed its tone,
 For he thought of the days when he called her his own,
 An' his eye blazed like lightnin' from under the cloud
 On his false-hearted girl, reproachful and proud,
 An' says he: "Kathleen bawn, is it thrue what I hear,
 That you marry of your free choice, without threat or fear?
 If so, spake the word, an' I'll turn and depart,
 Chated once, and once only by woman's false heart."
 Oh! sorrow and love made the poor girl dumb,
 An' she thried hard to spake, but the words wouldn't come,
 For the sound of his voice, as he stood there fornint her,
 Wint could on her heart as the night wind in winther.
 An' the tears in her blue eyes stood tremblin' to flow,
 And pale was her cheek as the moonshine on snow;
 Then the heart of bould Phaudhrig swelled high in its place,
 For he knew, by one look in that beautiful face,

 That though sthrangers an' foemen their pledged hands might
sever, Her true heart was his, and his only, for ever.
 An' he lifted his voice, like the agle's hoarse call,
 An' says Phaudhrig, "She's mine still, in spite of yez all!"
 Then up jumped O'Hanlon, an' a tall boy was he,
 An' he looked on bould Phaudhrig as fierce as could be,
 An' says he, "By the hokey! before you go out,
 Bould Phaudhrig Crohoore, you must fight for a bout."
 Then Phaudhrig made answer: "I'll do my endeavour,"
 An' with one blow he stretched bould O'Hanlon for ever.
 In his arms he took Kathleen, an' stepped to the door;
 And he leaped on his horse, and flung her before;
 An' they all were so bother'd, that not a man stirred
 Till the galloping hoofs on the pavement were heard.
 Then up they all started, like bees in the swarm,
 An' they riz a great shout, like the burst of a storm,
 An' they roared, and they ran, and they shouted galore;
 But Kathleen and Phaudhrig they never saw more.

 'But them days are gone by, an' he is no more;
 An' the green-grass is growin' o'er Phaudhrig Crohoore,
 For he couldn't be aisy or quiet at all;
 As he lived a brave boy, he resolved so to fall.
 And he took a good pike&mdash;for Phaudhrig was great&mdash;
 And he fought, and he died in the year ninety-eight.
 An' the day that Crohoore in the green field was killed,
 A sthrong boy was sthretched, and a sthrong heart was stilled.'
</pre>
    <p>
      It is due to the memory of Finley to say that the foregoing ballad, though
      bearing throughout a strong resemblance to Sir Walter Scott's 'Lochinvar,'
      was nevertheless composed long before that spirited production had seen
      the light.
    </p>



    <h2>
      JIM SULIVAN'S ADVENTURES IN THE GREAT SNOW.
    </h2>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     Being a Ninth Extract from the Legacy of the late Francis
     Purcell, P.P. of Drumcoolagh.
</pre>
    <p>
      Jim Sulivan was a dacent, honest boy as you'd find in the seven parishes,
      an' he was a beautiful singer, an' an illegant dancer intirely, an' a
      mighty plisant boy in himself; but he had the divil's bad luck, for he
      married for love, an 'av coorse he niver had an asy minute afther.
    </p>
    <p>
      Nell Gorman was the girl he fancied, an' a beautiful slip of a girl she
      was, jist twinty to the minute when he married her. She was as round an'
      as complate in all her shapes as a firkin, you'd think, an' her two cheeks
      was as fat an' as red, it id open your heart to look at them.
    </p>
    <p>
      But beauty is not the thing all through, an' as beautiful as she was she
      had the divil's tongue, an' the divil's timper, an' the divil's behaviour
      all out; an' it was impossible for him to be in the house with her for
      while you'd count tin without havin' an argymint, an' as sure as she riz
      an argymint with him she'd hit him a wipe iv a skillet or whatever lay
      next to her hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, this wasn't at all plasin' to Jim Sulivan you may be sure, an' there
      was scarce a week that his head wasn't plasthered up, or his back bint
      double, or his nose swelled as big as a pittaty, with the vilence iv her
      timper, an' his heart was scalded everlastin'ly with her tongue; so he had
      no pace or quietness in body or soul at all at all, with the way she was
      goin' an.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, your honour, one cowld snowin' evenin' he kim in afther his day's
      work regulatin' the men in the farm, an' he sat down very quite by the
      fire, for he had a scrimmidge with her in the mornin', an' all he wanted
      was an air iv the fire in pace; so divil a word he said but dhrew a stool
      an' sat down close to the fire. Well, as soon as the woman saw him,
    </p>
    <p>
      'Move aff,' says she, 'an' don't be inthrudin' an the fire,' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, he kept never mindin', an' didn't let an' to hear a word she was
      sayin', so she kim over an' she had a spoon in her hand, an' she took jist
      the smallest taste in life iv the boilin' wather out iv the pot, an' she
      dhropped it down an his shins, an' with that he let a roar you'd think the
      roof id fly aff iv the house.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Hould your tongue, you barbarrian,' says she; 'you'll waken the child,'
      says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'An' if I done right,' says he, for the spoonful of boilin' wather riz him
      entirely, 'I'd take yourself,' says he, 'an' I'd stuff you into the pot an
      the fire, an' boil you.' says he, 'into castor oil,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'That's purty behavour,' says she; 'it's fine usage you're givin' me,
      isn't it?' says she, gettin' wickeder every minute; 'but before I'm
      boiled,' says she, 'thry how you like THAT,' says she; an', sure enough,
      before he had time to put up his guard, she hot him a rale terrible clink
      iv the iron spoon acrass the jaw.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Hould me, some iv ye, or I'll murdher her,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Will you?' says she, an' with that she hot him another tin times as good
      as the first.
    </p>
    <p>
      'By jabers,' says he, slappin' himself behind, 'that's the last salute
      you'll ever give me,' says he; 'so take my last blessin',' says he, 'you
      ungovernable baste!' says he&mdash;an' with that he pulled an his hat an'
      walked out iv the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, she never minded a word he said, for he used to say the same thing
      all as one every time she dhrew blood; an' she had no expectation at all
      but he'd come back by the time supper id be ready; but faix the story
      didn't go quite so simple this time, for while he was walkin', lonesome
      enough, down the borheen, with his heart almost broke with the pain, for
      his shins an' his jaw was mighty troublesome, av course, with the
      thratement he got, who did he see but Mick Hanlon, his uncle's sarvint by,
      ridin' down, quite an asy, an the ould black horse, with a halter as long
      as himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Is that Mr. Soolivan?' says the by. says he, as soon as he saw him a good
      bit aff.
    </p>
    <p>
      'To be sure it is, ye spalpeen, you,' says Jim, roarin' out; 'what do you
      want wid me this time a-day?' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Don't you know me?' says the gossoon, 'it's Mick Hanlon that's in it,'
      says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh, blur an agers, thin, it's welcome you are, Micky asthore,' says Jim;
      'how is all wid the man an' the woman beyant?' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh!' says Micky, 'bad enough,' says he; 'the ould man's jist aff, an' if
      you don't hurry like shot,' says he, 'he'll be in glory before you get
      there,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'It's jokin' ye are,' says Jim, sorrowful enough, for he was mighty
      partial to his uncle intirely.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh, not in the smallest taste,' says Micky; 'the breath was jist out iv
      him,' says he, 'when I left the farm. "An", says he, "take the ould black
      horse," says he, "for he's shure-footed for the road," says he, "an'
      bring, Jim Soolivan here," says he, "for I think I'd die asy af I could
      see him onst," says he.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well,' says Jim, 'will I have time,' says he, 'to go back to the house,
      for it would be a consolation,' says he, 'to tell the bad news to the
      woman?' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'It's too late you are already,' says Micky, 'so come up behind me, for
      God's sake,' says he, 'an' don't waste time;' an' with that he brought the
      horse up beside the ditch, an' Jim Soolivan mounted up behind Micky, an'
      they rode off; an' tin good miles it was iv a road, an' at the other side
      iv Keeper intirely; an' it was snowin' so fast that the ould baste could
      hardly go an at all at all, an' the two bys an his back was jist like a
      snowball all as one, an' almost fruz an' smothered at the same time, your
      honour; an' they wor both mighty sorrowful intirely, an' their toes almost
      dhroppin' aff wid the could.
    </p>
    <p>
      And when Jim got to the farm his uncle was gettin' an illegantly, an' he
      was sittin' up sthrong an' warm in the bed, an' improvin' every minute,
      an' no signs av dyin' an him at all at all; so he had all his throuble for
      nothin'.
    </p>
    <p>
      But this wasn't all, for the snow kem so thick that it was impassible to
      get along the roads at all at all; an' faix, instead iv gettin' betther,
      next mornin' it was only tin times worse; so Jim had jist to take it asy,
      an' stay wid his uncle antil such times as the snow id melt.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, your honour, the evenin' Jim Soolivan wint away, whin the dark was
      closin' in, Nell Gorman, his wife, beginned to get mighty anasy in herself
      whin she didn't see him comin' back at all; an' she was gettin' more an'
      more frightful in herself every minute till the dark kem an', an' divil a
      taste iv her husband was coming at all at all.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh!' says she, 'there's no use in purtendin', I know he's kilt himself;
      he has committed infantycide an himself,' says she, 'like a dissipated
      bliggard as he always was,' says she, 'God rest his soul. Oh, thin, isn't
      it me an' not you, Jim Soolivan, that's the unforthunate woman,' says she,
      'for ain't I cryin' here, an' isn't he in heaven, the bliggard,' says she.
      'Oh, voh, voh, it's not at home comfortable with your wife an' family that
      you are, Jim Soolivan,' says she, 'but in the other world, you aumathaun,
      in glory wid the saints I hope,' says she. 'It's I that's the unforthunate
      famale,' says she, 'an' not yourself, Jim Soolivan,' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      An' this way she kep' an till mornin', cryin' and lamintin; an' wid the
      first light she called up all the sarvint bys, an' she tould them to go
      out an' to sarch every inch iv ground to find the corpse, 'for I'm sure,'
      says she, 'it's not to go hide himself he would,' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, they went as well as they could, rummagin' through the snow, antil,
      at last, what should they come to, sure enough, but the corpse of a poor
      thravelling man, that fell over the quarry the night before by rason of
      the snow and some liquor he had, maybe; but, at any rate, he was as dead
      as a herrin', an' his face was knocked all to pieces jist like an
      over-boiled pitaty, glory be to God; an' divil a taste iv a nose or a
      chin, or a hill or a hollow from one end av his face to the other but was
      all as flat as a pancake. An' he was about Jim Soolivan's size, an'
      dhressed out exactly the same, wid a ridin' coat an' new corderhoys; so
      they carried him home, an' they were all as sure as daylight it was Jim
      Soolivan himself, an' they were wondhering he'd do sich a dirty turn as to
      go kill himself for spite.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, your honour, they waked him as well as they could, with what
      neighbours they could git togither, but by rason iv the snow, there wasn't
      enough gothered to make much divarsion; however it was a plisint wake
      enough, an' the churchyard an' the priest bein' convanient, as soon as the
      youngsthers had their bit iv fun and divarsion out iv the corpse, they
      burried it without a great dale iv throuble; an' about three days afther
      the berrin, ould Jim Mallowney, from th'other side iv the little hill, her
      own cousin by the mother's side&mdash;he had a snug bit iv a farm an' a
      house close by, by the same token&mdash;kem walkin' in to see how she was
      in her health, an' he dhrew a chair, an' he sot down an' beginned to
      convarse her about one thing an' another, antil he got her quite an' asy
      into middlin' good humour, an' as soon as he seen it was time:
    </p>
    <p>
      'I'm wondherin', says he, 'Nell Gorman, sich a handsome, likely girl, id
      be thinkin' iv nothin' but lamintin' an' the likes,' says he, 'an'
      lingerin' away her days without any consolation, or gettin' a husband,'
      says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh,' says she, 'isn't it only three days since I burried the poor man,'
      says she, 'an' isn't it rather soon to be talkin iv marryin' agin?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Divil a taste,' says he, 'three days is jist the time to a minute for
      cryin' afther a husband, an' there's no occasion in life to be keepin' it
      up,' says he; 'an' besides all that,' says he, 'Shrovetide is almost over,
      an' if you don't be sturrin' yourself an' lookin' about you, you'll be
      late,' says he, 'for this year at any rate, an' that's twelve months lost;
      an' who's to look afther the farm all that time,' says he, 'an' to keep
      the men to their work?' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'It's thrue for you, Jim Mallowney,' says she, 'but I'm afeard the
      neighbours will be all talkin' about it,' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Divil's cure to the word,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'An' who would you advise?' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Young Andy Curtis is the boy,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'He's a likely boy in himself,' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'An' as handy a gossoon as is out,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, thin, Jim Mallowney,' says she, 'here's my hand, an' you may be
      talkin' to Andy Curtis, an' if he's willin' I'm agreeble&mdash;is that
      enough?' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      So with that he made off with himself straight to Andy Curtis; an' before
      three days more was past, the weddin' kem an', an' Nell Gorman an' Andy
      Curtis was married as complate as possible; an' if the wake was plisint
      the weddin' was tin times as agreeble, an' all the neighbours that could
      make their way to it was there, an' there was three fiddlers an' lots iv
      pipers, an' ould Connor Shamus(1) the piper himself was in it&mdash;by the
      same token it was the last weddin' he ever played music at, for the next
      mornin', whin he was goin' home, bein' mighty hearty an' plisint in
      himself, he was smothered in the snow, undher the ould castle; an' by my
      sowl he was a sore loss to the bys an' girls twenty miles round, for he
      was the illigantest piper, barrin' the liquor alone, that ever worked a
      bellas.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     (1) Literally, Cornelius James&mdash;the last name employed as a
     patronymic. Connor is commonly used. Corney, pronounced
     Kurny, is just as much used in the South, as the short name
     for Cornelius.
</pre>
    <p>
      Well, a week passed over smart enough, an' Nell an' her new husband was
      mighty well continted with one another, for it was too soon for her to
      begin to regulate him the way she used with poor Jim Soolivan, so they wor
      comfortable enough; but this was too good to last, for the thaw kem an',
      an' you may be sure Jim Soolivan didn't lose a minute's time as soon as
      the heavy dhrift iv snow was melted enough between him and home to let him
      pass, for he didn't hear a word iv news from home sinst he lift it, by
      rason that no one, good nor bad, could thravel at all, with the way the
      snow was dhrifted.
    </p>
    <p>
      So one night, when Nell Gorman an' her new husband, Andy Curtis, was snug
      an' warm in bed, an' fast asleep, an' everything quite, who should come to
      the door, sure enough, but Jim Soolivan himself, an' he beginned flakin'
      the door wid a big blackthorn stick he had, an' roarin' out like the divil
      to open the door, for he had a dhrop taken.
    </p>
    <p>
      'What the divil's the matther?' says Andy Curtis, wakenin' out iv his
      sleep.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Who's batin' the door?' says Nell; 'what's all the noise for?' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Who's in it?' says Andy.
    </p>
    <p>
      'It's me,' says Jim.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Who are you?' says Andy; 'what's your name?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Jim Soolivan,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'By jabers, you lie,' says Andy.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Wait till I get at you,' says Jim, hittin' the door a lick iv the wattle
      you'd hear half a mile off.
    </p>
    <p>
      'It's him, sure enough,' says Nell; 'I know his speech; it's his
      wandherin' sowl that can't get rest, the crass o' Christ betune us an'
      harm.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Let me in,' says Jim, 'or I'll dhrive the door in a top iv yis.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Jim Soolivan&mdash;Jim Soolivan,' says Nell, sittin' up in the bed, an'
      gropin' for a quart bottle iv holy wather she used to hang by the back iv
      the bed, 'don't come in, darlin'&mdash;there's holy wather here,' says
      she; 'but tell me from where you are is there anything that's throublin'
      your poor sinful sowl?' says she. 'An' tell me how many masses 'ill make
      you asy, an' by this crass, I'll buy you as many as you want,' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I don't know what the divil you mane,' says Jim.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Go back,' says she, 'go back to glory, for God's sake,' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Divil's cure to the bit iv me 'ill go back to glory, or anywhere else,'
      says he, 'this blessed night; so open the door at onst' an' let me in,'
      says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'The Lord forbid,' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'By jabers, you'd betther,' says he, 'or it 'ill be the worse for you,'
      says he; an' wid that he fell to wallopin' the door till he was fairly
      tired, an' Andy an' his wife crassin' themselves an' sayin' their prayers
      for the bare life all the time.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Jim Soolivan,' says she, as soon as he was done, 'go back, for God's
      sake, an' don't be freakenin' me an' your poor fatherless childhren,' says
      she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Why, you bosthoon, you,' says Jim, 'won't you let your husband in,' says
      he, 'to his own house?' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'You WOR my husband, sure enough,' says she, 'but it's well you know, Jim
      Soolivan, you're not my husband NOW,' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'You're as dhrunk as can be consaved, says Jim.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Go back, in God's name, pacibly to your grave,' says Nell.
    </p>
    <p>
      'By my sowl, it's to my grave you'll sind me, sure enough,' says he, 'you
      hard-hearted bain', for I'm jist aff wid the cowld,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Jim Sulivan,' says she, 'it's in your dacent coffin you should be, you
      unforthunate sperit,' says she; 'what is it's annoyin' your sowl, in the
      wide world, at all?' says she; 'hadn't you everything complate?' says she,
      'the oil, an' the wake, an' the berrin'?' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Och, by the hoky,' says Jim, 'it's too long I'm makin' a fool iv mysilf,
      gostherin' wid you outside iv my own door,' says he, 'for it's plain to be
      seen,' says he, 'you don't know what your're sayin', an' no one ELSE knows
      what you mane, you unforthunate fool,' says he; 'so, onst for all, open
      the door quietly,' says he, 'or, by my sowkins, I'll not lave a splinther
      together,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, whin Nell an' Andy seen he was getting vexed, they beginned to bawl
      out their prayers, with the fright, as if the life was lavin' them; an'
      the more he bate the door, the louder they prayed, until at last Jim was
      fairly tired out.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Bad luck to you,' says he; 'for a rale divil av a woman,' says he. I
      'can't get any advantage av you, any way; but wait till I get hould iv
      you, that's all,' says he. An' he turned aff from the door, an' wint round
      to the cow-house, an' settled himself as well as he could, in the sthraw;
      an' he was tired enough wid the thravellin' he had in the day-time, an' a
      good dale bothered with what liquor he had taken; so he was purty sure of
      sleepin' wherever he thrun himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      But, by my sowl, it wasn't the same way with the man an' the woman in the
      house&mdash;for divil a wink iv sleep, good or bad, could they get at all,
      wid the fright iv the sperit, as they supposed; an' with the first light
      they sint a little gossoon, as fast as he could wag, straight off, like a
      shot, to the priest, an' to desire him, for the love o' God, to come to
      them an the minute, an' to bring, if it was plasin' to his raverence, all
      the little things he had for sayin' mass, an' savin' sowls, an' banishin'
      sperits, an' freakenin' the divil, an' the likes iv that. An' it wasn't
      long till his raverence kem down, sure enough, on the ould grey mare, wid
      the little mass-boy behind him, an' the prayer-books an' Bibles, an' all
      the other mystarious articles that was wantin', along wid him; an' as soon
      as he kem in, 'God save all here,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'God save ye, kindly, your raverence,' says they.
    </p>
    <p>
      'An' what's gone wrong wid ye?' says he; 'ye must be very bad,' says he,'
      entirely, to disturb my devotions,' says he, 'this way, jist at
      breakfast-time,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'By my sowkins,' says Nell, 'it's bad enough we are, your raverence,' says
      she, 'for it's poor Jim's sperit,' says she; 'God rest his sowl, wherever
      it is,' says she, 'that was wandherin' up an' down, opossite the door all
      night,' says she, 'in the way it was no use at all, thryin' to get a wink
      iv sleep,' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'It's to lay it, you want me, I suppose,' says the priest.
    </p>
    <p>
      'If your raverence 'id do that same, it 'id be plasin' to us,' says Andy.
    </p>
    <p>
      'It'll be rather expinsive,' says the priest.
    </p>
    <p>
      'We'll not differ about the price, your raverence,' says Andy.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Did the sperit stop long?' says the priest.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Most part iv the night,' says Nell, 'the Lord be merciful to us all!'
      says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'That'll make it more costly than I thought,' says he. 'An' did it make
      much noise?' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'By my sowl, it's it that did,' says Andy; 'leatherin' the door wid sticks
      and stones,' says he, 'antil I fairly thought every minute,' says he, 'the
      ould boords id smash, an' the sperit id be in an top iv us&mdash;God bless
      us,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Phiew!' says the priest; 'it'll cost a power iv money.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, your raverence,' says Andy, 'take whatever you like,' says he;
      'only make sure it won't annoy us any more,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh! by my sowkins,' says the priest, 'it'll be the quarest ghost in the
      siven parishes,' says he, 'if it has the courage to come back,' says he,
      'afther what I'll do this mornin', plase God,' says he; 'so we'll say
      twelve pounds; an' God knows it's chape enough,' says he, 'considherin'
      all the sarcumstances,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, there wasn't a second word to the bargain; so they paid him the
      money down, an' he sot the table doun like an althar, before the door, an'
      he settled it out vid all the things he had wid him; an' he lit a bit iv a
      holy candle, an' he scathered his holy wather right an' left; an' he took
      up a big book, an' he wint an readin' for half an hour, good; an' whin he
      kem to the end, he tuck hould iv his little bell, and he beginned to ring
      it for the bare life; an', by my sowl, he rung it so well, that he wakened
      Jim Sulivan in the cowhouse, where he was sleepin', an' up he jumped,
      widout a minute's delay, an' med right for the house, where all the
      family, an' the priest, an' the little mass-boy was assimbled, layin' the
      ghost; an' as soon as his raverence seen him comin' in at the door, wid
      the fair fright, he flung the bell at his head, an' hot him sich a lick iv
      it in the forehead, that he sthretched him on the floor; but fain; he
      didn't wait to ax any questions, but he cut round the table as if the
      divil was afther him, an' out at the door, an' didn't stop even as much as
      to mount an his mare, but leathered away down the borheen as fast as his
      legs could carry him, though the mud was up to his knees, savin' your
      presence.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, by the time Jim kem to himself, the family persaved the mistake, an'
      Andy wint home, lavin' Nell to make the explanation. An' as soon as Jim
      heerd it all, he said he was quite contint to lave her to Andy, entirely;
      but the priest would not hear iv it; an' he jist med him marry his wife
      over again, an' a merry weddin' it was, an' a fine collection for his
      raverence. An' Andy was there along wid the rest, an' the priest put a
      small pinnance upon him, for bein' in too great a hurry to marry a widdy.
    </p>
    <p>
      An' bad luck to the word he'd allow anyone to say an the business, ever
      after, at all, at all; so, av coorse, no one offinded his raverence, by
      spakin' iv the twelve pounds he got for layin' the sperit.
    </p>
    <p>
      An' the neighbours wor all mighty well plased, to be sure, for gettin' all
      the divarsion of a wake, an' two weddin's for nothin.'
    </p>
    <h2>
      A CHAPTER IN THE HISTORY OF A TYRONE FAMILY
    </h2>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     Being a Tenth Extract from the Legacy of the late Francis
     Purcell, P.P. of Drumcoolagh.
</pre>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_INTR" id="link2H_INTR">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      INTRODUCTION.
    </h2>
    <p>
      In the following narrative, I have endeavoured to give as nearly as
      possible the ipsissima verba of the valued friend from whom I received it,
      conscious that any aberration from HER mode of telling the tale of her own
      life would at once impair its accuracy and its effect.
    </p>
    <p>
      Would that, with her words, I could also bring before you her animated
      gesture, her expressive countenance, the solemn and thrilling air and
      accent with which she related the dark passages in her strange story; and,
      above all, that I could communicate the impressive consciousness that the
      narrator had seen with her own eyes, and personally acted in the scenes
      which she described; these accompaniments, taken with the additional
      circumstance that she who told the tale was one far too deeply and sadly
      impressed with religious principle to misrepresent or fabricate what she
      repeated as fact, gave to the tale a depth of interest which the events
      recorded could hardly, themselves, have produced.
    </p>
    <p>
      I became acquainted with the lady from whose lips I heard this narrative
      nearly twenty years since, and the story struck my fancy so much that I
      committed it to paper while it was still fresh in my mind; and should its
      perusal afford you entertainment for a listless half hour, my labour shall
      not have been bestowed in vain.
    </p>
    <p>
      I find that I have taken the story down as she told it, in the first
      person, and perhaps this is as it should be.
    </p>
    <p>
      She began as follows:
    </p>
    <p>
      My maiden name was Richardson,(1) the designation of a family of some
      distinction in the county of Tyrone. I was the younger of two daughters,
      and we were the only children. There was a difference in our ages of
      nearly six years, so that I did not, in my childhood, enjoy that close
      companionship which sisterhood, in other circumstances, necessarily
      involves; and while I was still a child, my sister was married.
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     (1) I have carefully altered the names as they appear in the
     original MSS., for the reader will see that some of the
     circumstances recorded are not of a kind to reflect honour
     upon those involved in them; and as many are still living,
     in every way honoured and honourable, who stand in close
     relation to the principal actors in this drama, the reader
     will see the necessity of the course which we have adopted.
</pre>
    <p>
      The person upon whom she bestowed her hand was a Mr. Carew, a gentleman of
      property and consideration in the north of England.
    </p>
    <p>
      I remember well the eventful day of the wedding; the thronging carriages,
      the noisy menials, the loud laughter, the merry faces, and the gay
      dresses. Such sights were then new to me, and harmonised ill with the
      sorrowful feelings with which I regarded the event which was to separate
      me, as it turned out, for ever from a sister whose tenderness alone had
      hitherto more than supplied all that I wanted in my mother's affection.
    </p>
    <p>
      The day soon arrived which was to remove the happy couple from Ashtown
      House. The carriage stood at the hall-door, and my poor sister kissed me
      again and again, telling me that I should see her soon.
    </p>
    <p>
      The carriage drove away, and I gazed after it until my eyes filled with
      tears, and, returning slowly to my chamber, I wept more bitterly and, so
      to speak, more desolately, than ever I had done before.
    </p>
    <p>
      My father had never seemed to love or to take an interest in me. He had
      desired a son, and I think he never thoroughly forgave me my unfortunate
      sex.
    </p>
    <p>
      My having come into the world at all as his child he regarded as a kind of
      fraudulent intrusion, and as his antipathy to me had its origin in an
      imperfection of mine, too radical for removal, I never even hoped to stand
      high in his good graces.
    </p>
    <p>
      My mother was, I dare say, as fond of me as she was of anyone; but she was
      a woman of a masculine and a worldly cast of mind. She had no tenderness
      or sympathy for the weaknesses, or even for the affections, of woman's
      nature and her demeanour towards me was peremptory, and often even harsh.
    </p>
    <p>
      It is not to be supposed, then, that I found in the society of my parents
      much to supply the loss of my sister. About a year after her marriage, we
      received letters from Mr. Carew, containing accounts of my sister's
      health, which, though not actually alarming, were calculated to make us
      seriously uneasy. The symptoms most dwelt upon were loss of appetite and
      cough.
    </p>
    <p>
      The letters concluded by intimating that he would avail himself of my
      father and mother's repeated invitation to spend some time at Ashtown,
      particularly as the physician who had been consulted as to my sister's
      health had strongly advised a removal to her native air.
    </p>
    <p>
      There were added repeated assurances that nothing serious was apprehended,
      as it was supposed that a deranged state of the liver was the only source
      of the symptoms which at first had seemed to intimate consumption.
    </p>
    <p>
      In accordance with this announcement, my sister and Mr. Carew arrived in
      Dublin, where one of my father's carriages awaited them, in readiness to
      start upon whatever day or hour they might choose for their departure.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was arranged that Mr. Carew was, as soon as the day upon which they
      were to leave Dublin was definitely fixed, to write to my father, who
      intended that the two last stages should be performed by his own horses,
      upon whose speed and safety far more reliance might be placed than upon
      those of the ordinary post-horses, which were at that time, almost without
      exception, of the very worst order. The journey, one of about ninety
      miles, was to be divided; the larger portion being reserved for the second
      day.
    </p>
    <p>
      On Sunday a letter reached us, stating that the party would leave Dublin
      on Monday, and, in due course, reach Ashtown upon Tuesday evening.
    </p>
    <p>
      Tuesday came the evening closed in, and yet no carriage; darkness came on,
      and still no sign of our expected visitors.
    </p>
    <p>
      Hour after hour passed away, and it was now past twelve; the night was
      remarkably calm, scarce a breath stirring, so that any sound, such as that
      produced by the rapid movement of a vehicle, would have been audible at a
      considerable distance. For some such sound I was feverishly listening.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was, however, my father's rule to close the house at nightfall, and the
      window-shutters being fastened, I was unable to reconnoitre the avenue as
      I would have wished. It was nearly one o'clock, and we began almost to
      despair of seeing them upon that night, when I thought I distinguished the
      sound of wheels, but so remote and faint as to make me at first very
      uncertain. The noise approached; it became louder and clearer; it stopped
      for a moment.
    </p>
    <p>
      I now heard the shrill screaming of the rusty iron, as the avenue-gate
      revolved on its hinges; again came the sound of wheels in rapid motion.
    </p>
    <p>
      'It is they,' said I, starting up; 'the carriage is in the avenue.'
    </p>
    <p>
      We all stood for a few moments breathlessly listening. On thundered the
      vehicle with the speed of a whirlwind; crack went the whip, and clatter
      went the wheels, as it rattled over the uneven pavement of the court. A
      general and furious barking from all the dogs about the house, hailed its
      arrival.
    </p>
    <p>
      We hurried to the hall in time to hear the steps let down with the sharp
      clanging noise peculiar to the operation, and the hum of voices exerted in
      the bustle of arrival. The hall-door was now thrown open, and we all
      stepped forth to greet our visitors.
    </p>
    <p>
      The court was perfectly empty; the moon was shining broadly and brightly
      upon all around; nothing was to be seen but the tall trees with their long
      spectral shadows, now wet with the dews of midnight.
    </p>
    <p>
      We stood gazing from right to left, as if suddenly awakened from a dream;
      the dogs walked suspiciously, growling and snuffing about the court, and
      by totally and suddenly ceasing their former loud barking, expressing the
      predominance of fear.
    </p>
    <p>
      We stared one upon another in perplexity and dismay, and I think I never
      beheld more pale faces assembled. By my father's direction, we looked
      about to find anything which might indicate or account for the noise which
      we had heard; but no such thing was to be seen&mdash;even the mire which
      lay upon the avenue was undisturbed. We returned to the house, more
      panic-struck than I can describe.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the next day, we learned by a messenger, who had ridden hard the
      greater part of the night, that my sister was dead. On Sunday evening, she
      had retired to bed rather unwell, and, on Monday, her indisposition
      declared itself unequivocally to be malignant fever. She became hourly
      worse and, on Tuesday night, a little after midnight, she expired.(2)
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     (2) The residuary legatee of the late Frances Purcell, who
     has the honour of selecting such of his lamented old
     friend's manuscripts as may appear fit for publication, in
     order that the lore which they contain may reach the world
     before scepticism and utility have robbed our species of the
     precious gift of credulity, and scornfully kicked before
     them, or trampled into annihilation those harmless fragments
     of picturesque superstition which it is our object to
     preserve, has been subjected to the charge of dealing too
     largely in the marvellous; and it has been half insinuated
     that such is his love for diablerie, that he is content to
     wander a mile out of his way, in order to meet a fiend or a
     goblin, and thus to sacrifice all regard for truth and
     accuracy to the idle hope of affrighting the imagination,
     and thus pandering to the bad taste of his reader. He begs
     leave, then, to take this opportunity of asserting his
     perfect innocence of all the crimes laid to his charge, and
     to assure his reader that he never PANDERED TO HIS BAD
     TASTE, nor went one inch out of his way to introduce witch,
     fairy, devil, ghost, or any other of the grim fraternity of
     the redoubted Raw-head-and-bloody-bones. His province,
     touching these tales, has been attended with no difficulty
     and little responsibility; indeed, he is accountable for
     nothing more than an alteration in the names of persons
     mentioned therein, when such a step seemed necessary, and
     for an occasional note, whenever he conceived it possible,
     innocently, to edge in a word. These tales have been WRITTEN
     DOWN, as the heading of each announces, by the Rev. Francis
     Purcell, P.P., of Drumcoolagh; and in all the instances,
     which are many, in which the present writer has had an
     opportunity of comparing the manuscript of his departed
     friend with the actual traditions which are current amongst
     the families whose fortunes they pretend to illustrate, he
     has uniformly found that whatever of supernatural occurred
     in the story, so far from having been exaggerated by him,
     had been rather softened down, and, wherever it could be
     attempted, accounted for.
</pre>
    <p>
      I mention this circumstance, because it was one upon which a thousand wild
      and fantastical reports were founded, though one would have thought that
      the truth scarcely required to be improved upon; and again, because it
      produced a strong and lasting effect upon my spirits, and indeed, I am
      inclined to think, upon my character.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was, for several years after this occurrence, long after the violence of
      my grief subsided, so wretchedly low-spirited and nervous, that I could
      scarcely be said to live; and during this time, habits of indecision,
      arising out of a listless acquiescence in the will of others, a fear of
      encountering even the slightest opposition, and a disposition to shrink
      from what are commonly called amusements, grew upon me so strongly, that I
      have scarcely even yet altogether overcome them.
    </p>
    <p>
      We saw nothing more of Mr. Carew. He returned to England as soon as the
      melancholy rites attendant upon the event which I have just mentioned were
      performed; and not being altogether inconsolable, he married again within
      two years; after which, owing to the remoteness of our relative
      situations, and other circumstances, we gradually lost sight of him.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was now an only child; and, as my elder sister had died without issue,
      it was evident that, in the ordinary course of things, my father's
      property, which was altogether in his power, would go to me; and the
      consequence was, that before I was fourteen, Ashtown House was besieged by
      a host of suitors. However, whether it was that I was too young, or that
      none of the aspirants to my hand stood sufficiently high in rank or
      wealth, I was suffered by both parents to do exactly as I pleased; and
      well was it for me, as I afterwards found, that fortune, or rather
      Providence, had so ordained it, that I had not suffered my affections to
      become in any degree engaged, for my mother would never have suffered any
      SILLY FANCY of mine, as she was in the habit of styling an attachment, to
      stand in the way of her ambitious views&mdash;views which she was
      determined to carry into effect, in defiance of every obstacle, and in
      order to accomplish which she would not have hesitated to sacrifice
      anything so unreasonable and contemptible as a girlish passion.
    </p>
    <p>
      When I reached the age of sixteen, my mother's plans began to develop
      themselves; and, at her suggestion, we moved to Dublin to sojourn for the
      winter, in order that no time might be lost in disposing of me to the best
      advantage.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had been too long accustomed to consider myself as of no importance
      whatever, to believe for a moment that I was in reality the cause of all
      the bustle and preparation which surrounded me, and being thus relieved
      from the pain which a consciousness of my real situation would have
      inflicted, I journeyed towards the capital with a feeling of total
      indifference.
    </p>
    <p>
      My father's wealth and connection had established him in the best society,
      and, consequently, upon our arrival in the metropolis we commanded
      whatever enjoyment or advantages its gaieties afforded.
    </p>
    <p>
      The tumult and novelty of the scenes in which I was involved did not fail
      considerably to amuse me, and my mind gradually recovered its tone, which
      was naturally cheerful.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was almost immediately known and reported that I was an heiress, and of
      course my attractions were pretty generally acknowledged.
    </p>
    <p>
      Among the many gentlemen whom it was my fortune to please, one, ere long,
      established himself in my mother's good graces, to the exclusion of all
      less important aspirants. However, I had not understood or even remarked
      his attentions, nor in the slightest degree suspected his or my mother's
      plans respecting me, when I was made aware of them rather abruptly by my
      mother herself.
    </p>
    <p>
      We had attended a splendid ball, given by Lord M&mdash;&mdash;, at his
      residence in Stephen's Green, and I was, with the assistance of my
      waiting-maid, employed in rapidly divesting myself of the rich ornaments
      which, in profuseness and value, could scarcely have found their equals in
      any private family in Ireland.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had thrown myself into a lounging-chair beside the fire, listless and
      exhausted, after the fatigues of the evening, when I was aroused from the
      reverie into which I had fallen by the sound of footsteps approaching my
      chamber, and my mother entered.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Fanny, my dear,' said she, in her softest tone, 'I wish to say a word or
      two with you before I go to rest. You are not fatigued, love, I hope?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'No, no, madam, I thank you,' said I, rising at the same time from my
      seat, with the formal respect so little practised now.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Sit down, my dear,' said she, placing herself upon a chair beside me; 'I
      must chat with you for a quarter of an hour or so. Saunders' (to the maid)
      'you may leave the room; do not close the room-door, but shut that of the
      lobby.'
    </p>
    <p>
      This precaution against curious ears having been taken as directed, my
      mother proceeded.
    </p>
    <p>
      'You have observed, I should suppose, my dearest Fanny&mdash;indeed, you
      MUST have observed Lord Glenfallen's marked attentions to you?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I assure you, madam&mdash;&mdash;' I began.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, well, that is all right,' interrupted my mother; 'of course you
      must be modest upon the matter; but listen to me for a few moments, my
      love, and I will prove to your satisfaction that your modesty is quite
      unnecessary in this case. You have done better than we could have hoped,
      at least so very soon. Lord Glenfallen is in love with you. I give you joy
      of your conquest;' and saying this, my mother kissed my forehead.
    </p>
    <p>
      'In love with me!' I exclaimed, in unfeigned astonishment.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Yes, in love with you,' repeated my mother; 'devotedly, distractedly in
      love with you. Why, my dear, what is there wonderful in it? Look in the
      glass, and look at these,' she continued, pointing with a smile to the
      jewels which I had just removed from my person, and which now lay a
      glittering heap upon the table.
    </p>
    <p>
      'May there not,' said I, hesitating between confusion and real alarm&mdash;'is
      it not possible that some mistake may be at the bottom of all this?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Mistake, dearest! none,' said my mother. 'None; none in the world. Judge
      for yourself; read this, my love.' And she placed in my hand a letter,
      addressed to herself, the seal of which was broken. I read it through with
      no small surprise. After some very fine complimentary flourishes upon my
      beauty and perfections, as also upon the antiquity and high reputation of
      our family, it went on to make a formal proposal of marriage, to be
      communicated or not to me at present, as my mother should deem expedient;
      and the letter wound up by a request that the writer might be permitted,
      upon our return to Ashtown House, which was soon to take place, as the
      spring was now tolerably advanced, to visit us for a few days, in case his
      suit was approved.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, well, my dear,' said my mother, impatiently; 'do you know who Lord
      Glenfallen is?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I do, madam,' said I rather timidly, for I dreaded an altercation with my
      mother.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, dear, and what frightens you?' continued she. 'Are you afraid of a
      title? What has he done to alarm you? he is neither old nor ugly.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I was silent, though I might have said, 'He is neither young nor
      handsome.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'My dear Fanny,' continued my mother, 'in sober seriousness you have been
      most fortunate in engaging the affections of a nobleman such as Lord
      Glenfallen, young and wealthy, with first-rate&mdash;yes, acknowledged
      FIRST-RATE abilities, and of a family whose influence is not exceeded by
      that of any in Ireland. Of course you see the offer in the same light that
      I do&mdash;indeed I think you MUST.'
    </p>
    <p>
      This was uttered in no very dubious tone. I was so much astonished by the
      suddenness of the whole communication that I literally did not know what
      to say.
    </p>
    <p>
      'You are not in love?' said my mother, turning sharply, and fixing her
      dark eyes upon me with severe scrutiny.
    </p>
    <p>
      'No, madam,' said I, promptly; horrified, as what young lady would not
      have been, at such a query.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I'm glad to hear it,' said my mother, drily. 'Once, nearly twenty years
      ago, a friend of mine consulted me as to how he should deal with a
      daughter who had made what they call a love-match&mdash;beggared herself,
      and disgraced her family; and I said, without hesitation, take no care for
      her, but cast her off. Such punishment I awarded for an offence committed
      against the reputation of a family not my own; and what I advised
      respecting the child of another, with full as small compunction I would DO
      with mine. I cannot conceive anything more unreasonable or intolerable
      than that the fortune and the character of a family should be marred by
      the idle caprices of a girl.'
    </p>
    <p>
      She spoke this with great severity, and paused as if she expected some
      observation from me.
    </p>
    <p>
      I, however, said nothing.
    </p>
    <p>
      'But I need not explain to you, my dear Fanny,' she continued, 'my views
      upon this subject; you have always known them well, and I have never yet
      had reason to believe you likely, voluntarily, to offend me, or to abuse
      or neglect any of those advantages which reason and duty tell you should
      be improved. Come hither, my dear; kiss me, and do not look so frightened.
      Well, now, about this letter, you need not answer it yet; of course you
      must be allowed time to make up your mind. In the meantime I will write to
      his lordship to give him my permission to visit us at Ashtown. Good-night,
      my love.'
    </p>
    <p>
      And thus ended one of the most disagreeable, not to say astounding,
      conversations I had ever had. It would not be easy to describe exactly
      what were my feelings towards Lord Glenfallen;&mdash;whatever might have
      been my mother's suspicions, my heart was perfectly disengaged&mdash;and
      hitherto, although I had not been made in the slightest degree acquainted
      with his real views, I had liked him very much, as an agreeable,
      well-informed man, whom I was always glad to meet in society. He had
      served in the navy in early life, and the polish which his manners
      received in his after intercourse with courts and cities had not served to
      obliterate that frankness of manner which belongs proverbially to the
      sailor.
    </p>
    <p>
      Whether this apparent candour went deeper than the outward bearing, I was
      yet to learn. However, there was no doubt that, as far as I had seen of
      Lord Glenfallen, he was, though perhaps not so young as might have been
      desired in a lover, a singularly pleasing man; and whatever feeling
      unfavourable to him had found its way into my mind, arose altogether from
      the dread, not an unreasonable one, that constraint might be practised
      upon my inclinations. I reflected, however, that Lord Glenfallen was a
      wealthy man, and one highly thought of; and although I could never expect
      to love him in the romantic sense of the term, yet I had no doubt but
      that, all things considered, I might be more happy with him than I could
      hope to be at home.
    </p>
    <p>
      When next I met him it was with no small embarrassment, his tact and good
      breeding, however, soon reassured me, and effectually prevented my
      awkwardness being remarked upon. And I had the satisfaction of leaving
      Dublin for the country with the full conviction that nobody, not even
      those most intimate with me, even suspected the fact of Lord Glenfallen's
      having made me a formal proposal.
    </p>
    <p>
      This was to me a very serious subject of self-gratulation, for, besides my
      instinctive dread of becoming the topic of the speculations of gossip, I
      felt that if the situation which I occupied in relation to him were made
      publicly known, I should stand committed in a manner which would scarcely
      leave me the power of retraction.
    </p>
    <p>
      The period at which Lord Glenfallen had arranged to visit Ashtown House
      was now fast approaching, and it became my mother's wish to form me
      thoroughly to her will, and to obtain my consent to the proposed marriage
      before his arrival, so that all things might proceed smoothly, without
      apparent opposition or objection upon my part. Whatever objections,
      therefore, I had entertained were to be subdued; whatever disposition to
      resistance I had exhibited or had been supposed to feel, were to be
      completely eradicated before he made his appearance; and my mother
      addressed herself to the task with a decision and energy against which
      even the barriers, which her imagination had created, could hardly have
      stood.
    </p>
    <p>
      If she had, however, expected any determined opposition from me, she was
      agreeably disappointed. My heart was perfectly free, and all my feelings
      of liking and preference were in favour of Lord Glenfallen; and I well
      knew that in case I refused to dispose of myself as I was desired, my
      mother had alike the power and the will to render my existence as utterly
      miserable as even the most ill-assorted marriage could possibly have done.
    </p>
    <p>
      You will remember, my good friend, that I was very young and very
      completely under the control of my parents, both of whom, my mother
      particularly, were unscrupulously determined in matters of this kind, and
      willing, when voluntary obedience on the part of those within their power
      was withheld, to compel a forced acquiescence by an unsparing use of all
      the engines of the most stern and rigorous domestic discipline.
    </p>
    <p>
      All these combined, not unnaturally, induced me to resolve upon yielding
      at once, and without useless opposition, to what appeared almost to be my
      fate.
    </p>
    <p>
      The appointed time was come, and my now accepted suitor arrived; he was in
      high spirits, and, if possible, more entertaining than ever.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was not, however, quite in the mood to enjoy his sprightliness; but
      whatever I wanted in gaiety was amply made up in the triumphant and
      gracious good-humour of my mother, whose smiles of benevolence and
      exultation were showered around as bountifully as the summer sunshine.
    </p>
    <p>
      I will not weary you with unnecessary prolixity. Let it suffice to say,
      that I was married to Lord Glenfallen with all the attendant pomp and
      circumstance of wealth, rank, and grandeur. According to the usage of the
      times, now humanely reformed, the ceremony was made, until long past
      midnight, the season of wild, uproarious, and promiscuous feasting and
      revelry.
    </p>
    <p>
      Of all this I have a painfully vivid recollection, and particularly of the
      little annoyances inflicted upon me by the dull and coarse jokes of the
      wits and wags who abound in all such places, and upon all such occasions.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was not sorry when, after a few days, Lord Glenfallen's carriage
      appeared at the door to convey us both from Ashtown; for any change would
      have been a relief from the irksomeness of ceremonial and formality which
      the visits received in honour of my newly-acquired titles hourly entailed
      upon me.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was arranged that we were to proceed to Cahergillagh, one of the
      Glenfallen estates, lying, however, in a southern county, so that, owing
      to the difficulty of the roads at the time, a tedious journey of three
      days intervened.
    </p>
    <p>
      I set forth with my noble companion, followed by the regrets of some, and
      by the envy of many; though God knows I little deserved the latter. The
      three days of travel were now almost spent, when, passing the brow of a
      wild heathy hill, the domain of Cahergillagh opened suddenly upon our
      view.
    </p>
    <p>
      It formed a striking and a beautiful scene. A lake of considerable extent
      stretching away towards the west, and reflecting from its broad, smooth
      waters, the rich glow of the setting sun, was overhung by steep hills,
      covered by a rich mantle of velvet sward, broken here and there by the
      grey front of some old rock, and exhibiting on their shelving sides, their
      slopes and hollows, every variety of light and shade; a thick wood of
      dwarf oak, birch, and hazel skirted these hills, and clothed the shores of
      the lake, running out in rich luxuriance upon every promontory, and
      spreading upward considerably upon the side of the hills.
    </p>
    <p>
      'There lies the enchanted castle,' said Lord Glenfallen, pointing towards
      a considerable level space intervening between two of the picturesque
      hills, which rose dimly around the lake.
    </p>
    <p>
      This little plain was chiefly occupied by the same low, wild wood which
      covered the other parts of the domain; but towards the centre a mass of
      taller and statelier forest trees stood darkly grouped together, and among
      them stood an ancient square tower, with many buildings of a humbler
      character, forming together the manorhouse, or, as it was more usually
      called, the Court of Cahergillagh.
    </p>
    <p>
      As we approached the level upon which the mansion stood, the winding road
      gave us many glimpses of the time-worn castle and its surrounding
      buildings; and seen as it was through the long vistas of the fine old
      trees, and with the rich glow of evening upon it, I have seldom beheld an
      object more picturesquely striking.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was glad to perceive, too, that here and there the blue curling smoke
      ascended from stacks of chimneys now hidden by the rich, dark ivy which,
      in a great measure, covered the building. Other indications of comfort
      made themselves manifest as we approached; and indeed, though the place
      was evidently one of considerable antiquity, it had nothing whatever of
      the gloom of decay about it.
    </p>
    <p>
      'You must not, my love,' said Lord Glenfallen, 'imagine this place worse
      than it is. I have no taste for antiquity&mdash;at least I should not
      choose a house to reside in because it is old. Indeed I do not recollect
      that I was even so romantic as to overcome my aversion to rats and
      rheumatism, those faithful attendants upon your noble relics of feudalism;
      and I much prefer a snug, modern, unmysterious bedroom, with well-aired
      sheets, to the waving tapestry, mildewed cushions, and all the other
      interesting appliances of romance. However, though I cannot promise you
      all the discomfort generally belonging to an old castle, you will find
      legends and ghostly lore enough to claim your respect; and if old Martha
      be still to the fore, as I trust she is, you will soon have a supernatural
      and appropriate anecdote for every closet and corner of the mansion; but
      here we are&mdash;so, without more ado, welcome to Cahergillagh!'
    </p>
    <p>
      We now entered the hall of the castle, and while the domestics were
      employed in conveying our trunks and other luggage which we had brought
      with us for immediate use to the apartments which Lord Glenfallen had
      selected for himself and me, I went with him into a spacious sitting-room,
      wainscoted with finely polished black oak, and hung round with the
      portraits of various worthies of the Glenfallen family.
    </p>
    <p>
      This room looked out upon an extensive level covered with the softest
      green sward, and irregularly bounded by the wild wood I have before
      mentioned, through the leafy arcade formed by whose boughs and trunks the
      level beams of the setting sun were pouring. In the distance a group of
      dairymaids were plying their task, which they accompanied throughout with
      snatches of Irish songs which, mellowed by the distance, floated not
      unpleasingly to the ear; and beside them sat or lay, with all the grave
      importance of conscious protection, six or seven large dogs of various
      kinds. Farther in the distance, and through the cloisters of the arching
      wood, two or three ragged urchins were employed in driving such stray kine
      as had wandered farther than the rest to join their fellows.
    </p>
    <p>
      As I looked upon this scene which I have described, a feeling of
      tranquillity and happiness came upon me, which I have never experienced in
      so strong a degree; and so strange to me was the sensation that my eyes
      filled with tears.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lord Glenfallen mistook the cause of my emotion, and taking me kindly and
      tenderly by the hand, he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Do not suppose, my love, that it is my intention to SETTLE here. Whenever
      you desire to leave this, you have only to let me know your wish, and it
      shall be complied with; so I must entreat of you not to suffer any
      circumstances which I can control to give you one moment's uneasiness. But
      here is old Martha; you must be introduced to her, one of the heirlooms of
      our family.'
    </p>
    <p>
      A hale, good-humoured, erect old woman was Martha, and an agreeable
      contrast to the grim, decrepid hag which my fancy had conjured up, as the
      depository of all the horrible tales in which I doubted not this old place
      was most fruitful.
    </p>
    <p>
      She welcomed me and her master with a profusion of gratulations,
      alternately kissing our hands and apologising for the liberty, until at
      length Lord Glenfallen put an end to this somewhat fatiguing ceremonial by
      requesting her to conduct me to my chamber if it were prepared for my
      reception.
    </p>
    <p>
      I followed Martha up an old-fashioned oak staircase into a long, dim
      passage, at the end of which lay the door which communicated with the
      apartments which had been selected for our use; here the old woman
      stopped, and respectfully requested me to proceed.
    </p>
    <p>
      I accordingly opened the door, and was about to enter, when something like
      a mass of black tapestry, as it appeared, disturbed by my sudden approach,
      fell from above the door, so as completely to screen the aperture; the
      startling unexpectedness of the occurrence, and the rustling noise which
      the drapery made in its descent, caused me involuntarily to step two or
      three paces backwards. I turned, smiling and half-ashamed, to the old
      servant, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'You see what a coward I am.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The woman looked puzzled, and, without saying any more, I was about to
      draw aside the curtain and enter the room, when, upon turning to do so, I
      was surprised to find that nothing whatever interposed to obstruct the
      passage.
    </p>
    <p>
      I went into the room, followed by the servant-woman, and was amazed to
      find that it, like the one below, was wainscoted, and that nothing like
      drapery was to be found near the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Where is it?' said I; 'what has become of it?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'What does your ladyship wish to know?' said the old woman.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Where is the black curtain that fell across the door, when I attempted
      first to come to my chamber?' answered I.
    </p>
    <p>
      'The cross of Christ about us!' said the old woman, turning suddenly pale.
    </p>
    <p>
      'What is the matter, my good friend?' said I; 'you seem frightened.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh no, no, your ladyship,' said the old woman, endeavouring to conceal
      her agitation; but in vain, for tottering towards a chair, she sank into
      it, looking so deadly pale and horror-struck that I thought every moment
      she would faint.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Merciful God, keep us from harm and danger!' muttered she at length.
    </p>
    <p>
      'What can have terrified you so?' said I, beginning to fear that she had
      seen something more than had met my eye. 'You appear ill, my poor woman!'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Nothing, nothing, my lady,' said she, rising. 'I beg your ladyship's
      pardon for making so bold. May the great God defend us from misfortune!'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Martha,' said I, 'something HAS frightened you very much, and I insist on
      knowing what it is; your keeping me in the dark upon the subject will make
      me much more uneasy than anything you could tell me. I desire you,
      therefore, to let me know what agitates you; I command you to tell me.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Your ladyship said you saw a black curtain falling across the door when
      you were coming into the room,' said the old woman.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I did,' said I; 'but though the whole thing appears somewhat strange, I
      cannot see anything in the matter to agitate you so excessively.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'It's for no good you saw that, my lady,' said the crone; 'something
      terrible is coming. It's a sign, my lady&mdash;a sign that never fails.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Explain, explain what you mean, my good woman,' said I, in spite of
      myself, catching more than I could account for, of her superstitious
      terror.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Whenever something&mdash;something BAD is going to happen to the
      Glenfallen family, some one that belongs to them sees a black handkerchief
      or curtain just waved or falling before their faces. I saw it myself,'
      continued she, lowering her voice, 'when I was only a little girl, and
      I'll never forget it. I often heard of it before, though I never saw it
      till then, nor since, praised be God. But I was going into Lady Jane's
      room to waken her in the morning; and sure enough when I got first to the
      bed and began to draw the curtain, something dark was waved across the
      division, but only for a moment; and when I saw rightly into the bed,
      there was she lying cold and dead, God be merciful to me! So, my lady,
      there is small blame to me to be daunted when any one of the family sees
      it; for it's many's the story I heard of it, though I saw it but once.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I was not of a superstitious turn of mind, yet I could not resist a
      feeling of awe very nearly allied to the fear which my companion had so
      unreservedly expressed; and when you consider my situation, the
      loneliness, antiquity, and gloom of the place, you will allow that the
      weakness was not without excuse.
    </p>
    <p>
      In spite of old Martha's boding predictions, however, time flowed on in an
      unruffled course. One little incident however, though trifling in itself,
      I must relate, as it serves to make what follows more intelligible.
    </p>
    <p>
      Upon the day after my arrival, Lord Glenfallen of course desired to make
      me acquainted with the house and domain; and accordingly we set forth upon
      our ramble. When returning, he became for some time silent and moody, a
      state so unusual with him as considerably to excite my surprise.
    </p>
    <p>
      I endeavoured by observations and questions to arouse him&mdash;but in
      vain. At length, as we approached the house, he said, as if speaking to
      himself:
    </p>
    <p>
      ''Twere madness&mdash;madness&mdash;madness,' repeating the words bitterly&mdash;'sure
      and speedy ruin.'
    </p>
    <p>
      There was here a long pause; and at length, turning sharply towards me, in
      a tone very unlike that in which he had hitherto addressed me, he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Do you think it possible that a woman can keep a secret?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I am sure,' said I, 'that women are very much belied upon the score of
      talkativeness, and that I may answer your question with the same
      directness with which you put it&mdash;I reply that I DO think a woman can
      keep a secret.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'But I do not,' said he, drily.
    </p>
    <p>
      We walked on in silence for a time. I was much astonished at his unwonted
      abruptness&mdash;I had almost said rudeness.
    </p>
    <p>
      After a considerable pause he seemed to recollect himself, and with an
      effort resuming his sprightly manner, he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, well, the next thing to keeping a secret well is, not to desire to
      possess one&mdash;talkativeness and curiosity generally go together. Now I
      shall make test of you, in the first place, respecting the latter of these
      qualities. I shall be your BLUEBEARD&mdash;tush, why do I trifle thus?
      Listen to me, my dear Fanny; I speak now in solemn earnest. What I desire
      is intimately, inseparably, connected with your happiness and honour as
      well as my own; and your compliance with my request will not be difficult.
      It will impose upon you a very trifling restraint during your sojourn
      here, which certain events which have occurred since our arrival have
      determined me shall not be a long one. You must promise me, upon your
      sacred honour, that you will visit ONLY that part of the castle which can
      be reached from the front entrance, leaving the back entrance and the part
      of the building commanded immediately by it to the menials, as also the
      small garden whose high wall you see yonder; and never at any time seek to
      pry or peep into them, nor to open the door which communicates from the
      front part of the house through the corridor with the back. I do not urge
      this in jest or in caprice, but from a solemn conviction that danger and
      misery will be the certain consequences of your not observing what I
      prescribe. I cannot explain myself further at present. Promise me, then,
      these things, as you hope for peace here, and for mercy hereafter.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I did make the promise as desired, and he appeared relieved; his manner
      recovered all its gaiety and elasticity: but the recollection of the
      strange scene which I have just described dwelt painfully upon my mind.
    </p>
    <p>
      More than a month passed away without any occurrence worth recording; but
      I was not destined to leave Cahergillagh without further adventure. One
      day, intending to enjoy the pleasant sunshine in a ramble through the
      woods, I ran up to my room to procure my bonnet and shawl. Upon entering
      the chamber, I was surprised and somewhat startled to find it occupied.
      Beside the fireplace, and nearly opposite the door, seated in a large,
      old-fashioned elbow-chair, was placed the figure of a lady. She appeared
      to be nearer fifty than forty, and was dressed suitably to her age, in a
      handsome suit of flowered silk; she had a profusion of trinkets and
      jewellery about her person, and many rings upon her fingers. But although
      very rich, her dress was not gaudy or in ill taste. But what was
      remarkable in the lady was, that although her features were handsome, and
      upon the whole pleasing, the pupil of each eye was dimmed with the
      whiteness of cataract, and she was evidently stone-blind. I was for some
      seconds so surprised at this unaccountable apparition, that I could not
      find words to address her.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Madam,' said I, 'there must be some mistake here&mdash;this is my
      bed-chamber.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Marry come up,' said the lady, sharply; 'YOUR chamber! Where is Lord
      Glenfallen?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'He is below, madam,' replied I; 'and I am convinced he will be not a
      little surprised to find you here.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I do not think he will,' said she; 'with your good leave, talk of what
      you know something about. Tell him I want him. Why does the minx
      dilly-dally so?'
    </p>
    <p>
      In spite of the awe which this grim lady inspired, there was something in
      her air of confident superiority which, when I considered our relative
      situations, was not a little irritating.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Do you know, madam, to whom you speak?' said I.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I neither know nor care,' said she; 'but I presume that you are some one
      about the house, so again I desire you, if you wish to continue here, to
      bring your master hither forthwith.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I must tell you, madam,' said I, 'that I am Lady Glenfallen.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'What's that?' said the stranger, rapidly.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I say, madam,' I repeated, approaching her that I might be more
      distinctly heard, 'that I am Lady Glenfallen.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'It's a lie, you trull!' cried she, in an accent which made me start, and
      at the same time, springing forward, she seized me in her grasp, and shook
      me violently, repeating, 'It's a lie&mdash;it's a lie!' with a rapidity
      and vehemence which swelled every vein of her face. The violence of her
      action, and the fury which convulsed her face, effectually terrified me,
      and disengaging myself from her grasp, I screamed as loud as I could for
      help. The blind woman continued to pour out a torrent of abuse upon me,
      foaming at the mouth with rage, and impotently shaking her clenched fists
      towards me.
    </p>
    <p>
      I heard Lord Glenfallen's step upon the stairs, and I instantly ran out;
      as I passed him I perceived that he was deadly pale, and just caught the
      words: 'I hope that demon has not hurt you?'
    </p>
    <p>
      I made some answer, I forget what, and he entered the chamber, the door of
      which he locked upon the inside. What passed within I know not; but I
      heard the voices of the two speakers raised in loud and angry altercation.
    </p>
    <p>
      I thought I heard the shrill accents of the woman repeat the words, 'Let
      her look to herself;' but I could not be quite sure. This short sentence,
      however, was, to my alarmed imagination, pregnant with fearful meaning.
    </p>
    <p>
      The storm at length subsided, though not until after a conference of more
      than two long hours. Lord Glenfallen then returned, pale and agitated.
    </p>
    <p>
      'That unfortunate woman,' said he, 'is out of her mind. I daresay she
      treated you to some of her ravings; but you need not dread any further
      interruption from her: I have brought her so far to reason. She did not
      hurt you, I trust.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'No, no,' said I; 'but she terrified me beyond measure.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well,' said he, 'she is likely to behave better for the future; and I
      dare swear that neither you nor she would desire, after what has passed,
      to meet again.'
    </p>
    <p>
      This occurrence, so startling and unpleasant, so involved in mystery, and
      giving rise to so many painful surmises, afforded me no very agreeable
      food for rumination.
    </p>
    <p>
      All attempts on my part to arrive at the truth were baffled; Lord
      Glenfallen evaded all my inquiries, and at length peremptorily forbid any
      further allusion to the matter. I was thus obliged to rest satisfied with
      what I had actually seen, and to trust to time to resolve the perplexities
      in which the whole transaction had involved me.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lord Glenfallen's temper and spirits gradually underwent a complete and
      most painful change; he became silent and abstracted, his manner to me was
      abrupt and often harsh, some grievous anxiety seemed ever present to his
      mind; and under its influence his spirits sunk and his temper became
      soured.
    </p>
    <p>
      I soon perceived that his gaiety was rather that which the stir and
      excitement of society produce, than the result of a healthy habit of mind;
      every day confirmed me in the opinion, that the considerate good-nature
      which I had so much admired in him was little more than a mere manner; and
      to my infinite grief and surprise, the gay, kind, open-hearted nobleman
      who had for months followed and flattered me, was rapidly assuming the
      form of a gloomy, morose, and singularly selfish man. This was a bitter
      discovery, and I strove to conceal it from myself as long as I could; but
      the truth was not to be denied, and I was forced to believe that Lord
      Glenfallen no longer loved me, and that he was at little pains to conceal
      the alteration in his sentiments.
    </p>
    <p>
      One morning after breakfast, Lord Glenfallen had been for some time
      walking silently up and down the room, buried in his moody reflections,
      when pausing suddenly, and turning towards me, he exclaimed:
    </p>
    <p>
      'I have it&mdash;I have it! We must go abroad, and stay there too; and if
      that does not answer, why&mdash;why, we must try some more effectual
      expedient. Lady Glenfallen, I have become involved in heavy
      embarrassments. A wife, you know, must share the fortunes of her husband,
      for better for worse; but I will waive my right if you prefer remaining
      here&mdash;here at Cahergillagh. For I would not have you seen elsewhere
      without the state to which your rank entitles you; besides, it would break
      your poor mother's heart,' he added, with sneering gravity. 'So make up
      your mind&mdash;Cahergillagh or France. I will start if possible in a
      week, so determine between this and then.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He left the room, and in a few moments I saw him ride past the window,
      followed by a mounted servant. He had directed a domestic to inform me
      that he should not be back until the next day.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was in very great doubt as to what course of conduct I should pursue, as
      to accompanying him in the continental tour so suddenly determined upon. I
      felt that it would be a hazard too great to encounter; for at Cahergillagh
      I had always the consciousness to sustain me, that if his temper at any
      time led him into violent or unwarrantable treatment of me, I had a remedy
      within reach, in the protection and support of my own family, from all
      useful and effective communication with whom, if once in France, I should
      be entirely debarred.
    </p>
    <p>
      As to remaining at Cahergillagh in solitude, and, for aught I knew,
      exposed to hidden dangers, it appeared to me scarcely less objectionable
      than the former proposition; and yet I feared that with one or other I
      must comply, unless I was prepared to come to an actual breach with Lord
      Glenfallen. Full of these unpleasing doubts and perplexities, I retired to
      rest.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was wakened, after having slept uneasily for some hours, by some person
      shaking me rudely by the shoulder; a small lamp burned in my room, and by
      its light, to my horror and amazement, I discovered that my visitant was
      the self-same blind old lady who had so terrified me a few weeks before.
    </p>
    <p>
      I started up in the bed, with a view to ring the bell, and alarm the
      domestics; but she instantly anticipated me by saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Do not be frightened, silly girl! If I had wished to harm you I could
      have done it while you were sleeping; I need not have wakened you. Listen
      to me, now, attentively and fearlessly, for what I have to say interests
      you to the full as much as it does me. Tell me here, in the presence of
      God, did Lord Glenfallen marry you&mdash;ACTUALLY MARRY you? Speak the
      truth, woman.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'As surely as I live and speak,' I replied, 'did Lord Glenfallen marry me,
      in presence of more than a hundred witnesses.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well,' continued she, 'he should have told you THEN, before you married
      him, that he had a wife living, which wife I am. I feel you tremble&mdash;tush!
      do not be frightened. I do not mean to harm you. Mark me now&mdash;you are
      NOT his wife. When I make my story known you will be so neither in the eye
      of God nor of man. You must leave this house upon to-morrow. Let the world
      know that your husband has another wife living; go you into retirement,
      and leave him to justice, which will surely overtake him. If you remain in
      this house after to-morrow you will reap the bitter fruits of your sin.'
    </p>
    <p>
      So saying, she quitted the room, leaving me very little disposed to sleep.
    </p>
    <p>
      Here was food for my very worst and most terrible suspicions; still there
      was not enough to remove all doubt. I had no proof of the truth of this
      woman's statement.
    </p>
    <p>
      Taken by itself, there was nothing to induce me to attach weight to it;
      but when I viewed it in connection with the extraordinary mystery of some
      of Lord Glenfallen's proceedings, his strange anxiety to exclude me from
      certain portions of the mansion, doubtless lest I should encounter this
      person&mdash;the strong influence, nay, command which she possessed over
      him, a circumstance clearly established by the very fact of her residing
      in the very place where, of all others, he should least have desired to
      find her&mdash;her thus acting, and continuing to act in direct
      contradiction to his wishes; when, I say, I viewed her disclosure in
      connection with all these circumstances, I could not help feeling that
      there was at least a fearful verisimilitude in the allegations which she
      had made.
    </p>
    <p>
      Still I was not satisfied, nor nearly so. Young minds have a reluctance
      almost insurmountable to believing, upon anything short of unquestionable
      proof, the existence of premeditated guilt in anyone whom they have ever
      trusted; and in support of this feeling I was assured that if the
      assertion of Lord Glenfallen, which nothing in this woman's manner had led
      me to disbelieve, were true, namely that her mind was unsound, the whole
      fabric of my doubts and fears must fall to the ground.
    </p>
    <p>
      I determined to state to Lord Glenfallen freely and accurately the
      substance of the communication which I had just heard, and in his words
      and looks to seek for its proof or refutation. Full of these thoughts, I
      remained wakeful and excited all night, every moment fancying that I heard
      the step or saw the figure of my recent visitor, towards whom I felt a
      species of horror and dread which I can hardly describe.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was something in her face, though her features had evidently been
      handsome, and were not, at first sight, unpleasing, which, upon a nearer
      inspection, seemed to indicate the habitual prevalence and indulgence of
      evil passions, and a power of expressing mere animal anger, with an
      intenseness that I have seldom seen equalled, and to which an almost
      unearthly effect was given by the convulsive quivering of the sightless
      eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      You may easily suppose that it was no very pleasing reflection to me to
      consider that, whenever caprice might induce her to return, I was within
      the reach of this violent and, for aught I knew, insane woman, who had,
      upon that very night, spoken to me in a tone of menace, of which her mere
      words, divested of the manner and look with which she uttered them, can
      convey but a faint idea.
    </p>
    <p>
      Will you believe me when I tell you that I was actually afraid to leave my
      bed in order to secure the door, lest I should again encounter the
      dreadful object lurking in some corner or peeping from behind the
      window-curtains, so very a child was I in my fears.
    </p>
    <p>
      The morning came, and with it Lord Glenfallen. I knew not, and indeed I
      cared not, where he might have been; my thoughts were wholly engrossed by
      the terrible fears and suspicions which my last night's conference had
      suggested to me. He was, as usual, gloomy and abstracted, and I feared in
      no very fitting mood to hear what I had to say with patience, whether the
      charges were true or false.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was, however, determined not to suffer the opportunity to pass, or Lord
      Glenfallen to leave the room, until, at all hazards, I had unburdened my
      mind.
    </p>
    <p>
      'My lord,' said I, after a long silence, summoning up all my firmness&mdash;'my
      lord, I wish to say a few words to you upon a matter of very great
      importance, of very deep concernment to you and to me.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I fixed my eyes upon him to discern, if possible, whether the announcement
      caused him any uneasiness; but no symptom of any such feeling was
      perceptible.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, my dear,' said he, 'this is no doubt a very grave preface, and
      portends, I have no doubt, something extraordinary. Pray let us have it
      without more ado.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He took a chair, and seated himself nearly opposite to me.
    </p>
    <p>
      'My lord,' said I, 'I have seen the person who alarmed me so much a short
      time since, the blind lady, again, upon last night.' His face, upon which
      my eyes were fixed, turned pale; he hesitated for a moment, and then said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'And did you, pray, madam, so totally forget or spurn my express command,
      as to enter that portion of the house from which your promise, I might say
      your oath, excluded you?&mdash;answer me that!' he added fiercely.
    </p>
    <p>
      'My lord,' said I, 'I have neither forgotten your COMMANDS, since such
      they were, nor disobeyed them. I was, last night, wakened from my sleep,
      as I lay in my own chamber, and accosted by the person whom I have
      mentioned. How she found access to the room I cannot pretend to say.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Ha! this must be looked to,' said he, half reflectively; 'and pray,'
      added he, quickly, while in turn he fixed his eyes upon me, 'what did this
      person say? since some comment upon her communication forms, no doubt, the
      sequel to your preface.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Your lordship is not mistaken,' said I; 'her statement was so
      extraordinary that I could not think of withholding it from you. She told
      me, my lord, that you had a wife living at the time you married me, and
      that she was that wife.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Lord Glenfallen became ashy pale, almost livid; he made two or three
      efforts to clear his voice to speak, but in vain, and turning suddenly
      from me, he walked to the window. The horror and dismay which, in the
      olden time, overwhelmed the woman of Endor when her spells unexpectedly
      conjured the dead into her presence, were but types of what I felt when
      thus presented with what appeared to be almost unequivocal evidence of the
      guilt whose existence I had before so strongly doubted.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a silence of some moments, during which it were hard to
      conjecture whether I or my companion suffered most.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lord Glenfallen soon recovered his self-command; he returned to the table,
      again sat down and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'What you have told me has so astonished me, has unfolded such a tissue of
      motiveless guilt, and in a quarter from which I had so little reason to
      look for ingratitude or treachery, that your announcement almost deprived
      me of speech; the person in question, however, has one excuse, her mind
      is, as I told you before, unsettled. You should have remembered that, and
      hesitated to receive as unexceptionable evidence against the honour of
      your husband, the ravings of a lunatic. I now tell you that this is the
      last time I shall speak to you upon this subject, and, in the presence of
      the God who is to judge me, and as I hope for mercy in the day of
      judgment, I swear that the charge thus brought against me is utterly
      false, unfounded, and ridiculous; I defy the world in any point to taint
      my honour; and, as I have never taken the opinion of madmen touching your
      character or morals, I think it but fair to require that you will evince a
      like tenderness for me; and now, once for all, never again dare to repeat
      to me your insulting suspicions, or the clumsy and infamous calumnies of
      fools. I shall instantly let the worthy lady who contrived this somewhat
      original device, understand fully my opinion upon the matter. Good
      morning;' and with these words he left me again in doubt, and involved in
      all horrors of the most agonising suspense.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had reason to think that Lord Glenfallen wreaked his vengeance upon the
      author of the strange story which I had heard, with a violence which was
      not satisfied with mere words, for old Martha, with whom I was a great
      favourite, while attending me in my room, told me that she feared her
      master had ill-used the poor blind Dutch woman, for that she had heard her
      scream as if the very life were leaving her, but added a request that I
      should not speak of what she had told me to any one, particularly to the
      master.
    </p>
    <p>
      'How do you know that she is a Dutch woman?' inquired I, anxious to learn
      anything whatever that might throw a light upon the history of this
      person, who seemed to have resolved to mix herself up in my fortunes.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Why, my lady,' answered Martha, 'the master often calls her the Dutch
      hag, and other names you would not like to hear, and I am sure she is
      neither English nor Irish; for, whenever they talk together, they speak
      some queer foreign lingo, and fast enough, I'll be bound. But I ought not
      to talk about her at all; it might be as much as my place is worth to
      mention her&mdash;only you saw her first yourself, so there can be no
      great harm in speaking of her now.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'How long has this lady been here?' continued I.
    </p>
    <p>
      'She came early on the morning after your ladyship's arrival,' answered
      she; 'but do not ask me any more, for the master would think nothing of
      turning me out of doors for daring to speak of her at all, much less to
      you, my lady.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I did not like to press the poor woman further, for her reluctance to
      speak on this topic was evident and strong.
    </p>
    <p>
      You will readily believe that upon the very slight grounds which my
      information afforded, contradicted as it was by the solemn oath of my
      husband, and derived from what was, at best, a very questionable source, I
      could not take any very decisive measure whatever; and as to the menace of
      the strange woman who had thus unaccountably twice intruded herself into
      my chamber, although, at the moment, it occasioned me some uneasiness, it
      was not, even in my eyes, sufficiently formidable to induce my departure
      from Cahergillagh.
    </p>
    <p>
      A few nights after the scene which I have just mentioned, Lord Glenfallen
      having, as usual, early retired to his study, I was left alone in the
      parlour to amuse myself as best I might.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was not strange that my thoughts should often recur to the agitating
      scenes in which I had recently taken a part.
    </p>
    <p>
      The subject of my reflections, the solitude, the silence, and the lateness
      of the hour, as also the depression of spirits to which I had of late been
      a constant prey, tended to produce that nervous excitement which places us
      wholly at the mercy of the imagination.
    </p>
    <p>
      In order to calm my spirits I was endeavouring to direct my thoughts into
      some more pleasing channel, when I heard, or thought I heard, uttered,
      within a few yards of me, in an odd, half-sneering tone, the words,
    </p>
    <p>
      'There is blood upon your ladyship's throat.'
    </p>
    <p>
      So vivid was the impression that I started to my feet, and involuntarily
      placed my hand upon my neck.
    </p>
    <p>
      I looked around the room for the speaker, but in vain.
    </p>
    <p>
      I went then to the room-door, which I opened, and peered into the passage,
      nearly faint with horror lest some leering, shapeless thing should greet
      me upon the threshold.
    </p>
    <p>
      When I had gazed long enough to assure myself that no strange object was
      within sight, 'I have been too much of a rake lately; I am racking out my
      nerves,' said I, speaking aloud, with a view to reassure myself.
    </p>
    <p>
      I rang the bell, and, attended by old Martha, I retired to settle for the
      night.
    </p>
    <p>
      While the servant was&mdash;as was her custom&mdash;arranging the lamp
      which I have already stated always burned during the night in my chamber,
      I was employed in undressing, and, in doing so, I had recourse to a large
      looking-glass which occupied a considerable portion of the wall in which
      it was fixed, rising from the ground to a height of about six feet&mdash;this
      mirror filled the space of a large panel in the wainscoting opposite the
      foot of the bed.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had hardly been before it for the lapse of a minute when something like
      a black pall was slowly waved between me and it.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh, God! there it is,' I exclaimed, wildly. 'I have seen it again, Martha&mdash;the
      black cloth.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'God be merciful to us, then!' answered she, tremulously crossing herself.
      'Some misfortune is over us.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'No, no, Martha,' said I, almost instantly recovering my collectedness;
      for, although of a nervous temperament, I had never been superstitious. 'I
      do not believe in omens. You know I saw, or fancied I saw, this thing
      before, and nothing followed.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'The Dutch lady came the next morning,' replied she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'But surely her coming scarcely deserved such a dreadful warning,' I
      replied.
    </p>
    <p>
      'She is a strange woman, my lady,' said Martha; 'and she is not GONE yet&mdash;mark
      my words.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, well, Martha,' said I, 'I have not wit enough to change your
      opinions, nor inclination to alter mine; so I will talk no more of the
      matter. Good-night,' and so I was left to my reflections.
    </p>
    <p>
      After lying for about an hour awake, I at length fell into a kind of doze;
      but my imagination was still busy, for I was startled from this
      unrefreshing sleep by fancying that I heard a voice close to my face
      exclaim as before:
    </p>
    <p>
      'There is blood upon your ladyship's throat.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The words were instantly followed by a loud burst of laughter.
    </p>
    <p>
      Quaking with horror, I awakened, and heard my husband enter the room. Even
      this was it relief.
    </p>
    <p>
      Scared as I was, however, by the tricks which my imagination had played
      me, I preferred remaining silent, and pretending to sleep, to attempting
      to engage my husband in conversation, for I well knew that his mood was
      such, that his words would not, in all probability, convey anything that
      had not better be unsaid and unheard.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lord Glenfallen went into his dressing-room, which lay upon the right-hand
      side of the bed. The door lying open, I could see him by himself, at full
      length upon a sofa, and, in about half an hour, I became aware, by his
      deep and regularly drawn respiration, that he was fast asleep.
    </p>
    <p>
      When slumber refuses to visit one, there is something peculiarly
      irritating, not to the temper, but to the nerves, in the consciousness
      that some one is in your immediate presence, actually enjoying the boon
      which you are seeking in vain; at least, I have always found it so, and
      never more than upon the present occasion.
    </p>
    <p>
      A thousand annoying imaginations harassed and excited me; every object
      which I looked upon, though ever so familiar, seemed to have acquired a
      strange phantom-like character, the varying shadows thrown by the
      flickering of the lamplight, seemed shaping themselves into grotesque and
      unearthly forms, and whenever my eyes wandered to the sleeping figure of
      my husband, his features appeared to undergo the strangest and most
      demoniacal contortions.
    </p>
    <p>
      Hour after hour was told by the old clock, and each succeeding one found
      me, if possible, less inclined to sleep than its predecessor.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was now considerably past three; my eyes, in their involuntary
      wanderings, happened to alight upon the large mirror which was, as I have
      said, fixed in the wall opposite the foot of the bed. A view of it was
      commanded from where I lay, through the curtains. As I gazed fixedly upon
      it, I thought I perceived the broad sheet of glass shifting its position
      in relation to the bed; I riveted my eyes upon it with intense scrutiny;
      it was no deception, the mirror, as if acting of its own impulse, moved
      slowly aside, and disclosed a dark aperture in the wall, nearly as large
      as an ordinary door; a figure evidently stood in this, but the light was
      too dim to define it accurately.
    </p>
    <p>
      It stepped cautiously into the chamber, and with so little noise, that had
      I not actually seen it, I do not think I should have been aware of its
      presence. It was arrayed in a kind of woollen night-dress, and a white
      handkerchief or cloth was bound tightly about the head; I had no
      difficulty, spite of the strangeness of the attire, in recognising the
      blind woman whom I so much dreaded.
    </p>
    <p>
      She stooped down, bringing her head nearly to the ground, and in that
      attitude she remained motionless for some moments, no doubt in order to
      ascertain if any suspicious sound were stirring.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was apparently satisfied by her observations, for she immediately
      recommenced her silent progress towards a ponderous mahogany
      dressing-table of my husband's. When she had reached it, she paused again,
      and appeared to listen attentively for some minutes; she then noiselessly
      opened one of the drawers, from which, having groped for some time, she
      took something, which I soon perceived to be a case of razors. She opened
      it, and tried the edge of each of the two instruments upon the skin of her
      hand; she quickly selected one, which she fixed firmly in her grasp. She
      now stooped down as before, and having listened for a time, she, with the
      hand that was disengaged, groped her way into the dressing-room where Lord
      Glenfallen lay fast asleep.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was fixed as if in the tremendous spell of a nightmare. I could not stir
      even a finger; I could not lift my voice; I could not even breathe; and
      though I expected every moment to see the sleeping man murdered, I could
      not even close my eyes to shut out the horrible spectacle, which I had not
      the power to avert.
    </p>
    <p>
      I saw the woman approach the sleeping figure, she laid the unoccupied hand
      lightly along his clothes, and having thus ascertained his identity, she,
      after a brief interval, turned back and again entered my chamber; here she
      bent down again to listen.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had now not a doubt but that the razor was intended for my throat; yet
      the terrific fascination which had locked all my powers so long, still
      continued to bind me fast.
    </p>
    <p>
      I felt that my life depended upon the slightest ordinary exertion, and yet
      I could not stir one joint from the position in which I lay, nor even make
      noise enough to waken Lord Glenfallen.
    </p>
    <p>
      The murderous woman now, with long, silent steps, approached the bed; my
      very heart seemed turning to ice; her left hand, that which was
      disengaged, was upon the pillow; she gradually slid it forward towards my
      head, and in an instant, with the speed of lightning, it was clutched in
      my hair, while, with the other hand, she dashed the razor at my throat.
    </p>
    <p>
      A slight inaccuracy saved me from instant death; the blow fell short, the
      point of the razor grazing my throat. In a moment, I know not how, I found
      myself at the other side of the bed, uttering shriek after shriek; the
      wretch was, however, determined if possible to murder me.
    </p>
    <p>
      Scrambling along by the curtains, she rushed round the bed towards me; I
      seized the handle of the door to make my escape. It was, however,
      fastened. At all events, I could not open it. From the mere instinct of
      recoiling terror, I shrunk back into a corner. She was now within a yard
      of me. Her hand was upon my face.
    </p>
    <p>
      I closed my eyes fast, expecting never to open them again, when a blow,
      inflicted from behind by a strong arm, stretched the monster senseless at
      my feet. At the same moment the door opened, and several domestics,
      alarmed by my cries, entered the apartment.
    </p>
    <p>
      I do not recollect what followed, for I fainted. One swoon succeeded
      another, so long and death-like, that my life was considered very
      doubtful.
    </p>
    <p>
      At about ten o'clock, however, I sunk into a deep and refreshing sleep,
      from which I was awakened at about two, that I might swear my deposition
      before a magistrate, who attended for that purpose.
    </p>
    <p>
      I accordingly did so, as did also Lord Glenfallen, and the woman was fully
      committed to stand her trial at the ensuing assizes.
    </p>
    <p>
      I shall never forget the scene which the examination of the blind woman
      and of the other parties afforded.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was brought into the room in the custody of two servants. She wore a
      kind of flannel wrapper which had not been changed since the night before.
      It was torn and soiled, and here and there smeared with blood, which had
      flowed in large quantities from a wound in her head. The white
      handkerchief had fallen off in the scuffle, and her grizzled hair fell in
      masses about her wild and deadly pale countenance.
    </p>
    <p>
      She appeared perfectly composed, however, and the only regret she
      expressed throughout, was at not having succeeded in her attempt, the
      object of which she did not pretend to conceal.
    </p>
    <p>
      On being asked her name, she called herself the Countess Glenfallen, and
      refused to give any other title.
    </p>
    <p>
      'The woman's name is Flora Van-Kemp,' said Lord Glenfallen.
    </p>
    <p>
      'It WAS, it WAS, you perjured traitor and cheat!' screamed the woman; and
      then there followed a volley of words in some foreign language. 'Is there
      a magistrate here?' she resumed; 'I am Lord Glenfallen's wife&mdash;I'll
      prove it&mdash;write down my words. I am willing to be hanged or burned,
      so HE meets his deserts. I did try to kill that doll of his; but it was he
      who put it into my head to do it&mdash;two wives were too many; I was to
      murder her, or she was to hang me; listen to all I have to say.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Here Lord Glenfallen interrupted.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I think, sir,' said he, addressing the magistrate, 'that we had better
      proceed to business; this unhappy woman's furious recriminations but waste
      our time. If she refuses to answer your questions, you had better, I
      presume, take my depositions.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'And are you going to swear away my life, you black-perjured murderer?'
      shrieked the woman. 'Sir, sir, sir, you must hear me,' she continued,
      addressing the magistrate; 'I can convict him&mdash;he bid me murder that
      girl, and then, when I failed, he came behind me, and struck me down, and
      now he wants to swear away my life. Take down all I say.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'If it is your intention,' said the magistrate, 'to confess the crime with
      which you stand charged, you may, upon producing sufficient evidence,
      criminate whom you please.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Evidence!&mdash;I have no evidence but myself,' said the woman. 'I will
      swear it all&mdash;write down my testimony&mdash;write it down, I say&mdash;we
      shall hang side by side, my brave lord&mdash;all your own handy-work, my
      gentle husband.'
    </p>
    <p>
      This was followed by a low, insolent, and sneering laugh, which, from one
      in her situation, was sufficiently horrible.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I will not at present hear anything,' replied he, 'but distinct answers
      to the questions which I shall put to you upon this matter.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Then you shall hear nothing,' replied she sullenly, and no inducement or
      intimidation could bring her to speak again.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lord Glenfallen's deposition and mine were then given, as also those of
      the servants who had entered the room at the moment of my rescue.
    </p>
    <p>
      The magistrate then intimated that she was committed, and must proceed
      directly to gaol, whither she was brought in a carriage; of Lord
      Glenfallen's, for his lordship was naturally by no means indifferent to
      the effect which her vehement accusations against himself might produce,
      if uttered before every chance hearer whom she might meet with between
      Cahergillagh and the place of confinement whither she was despatched.
    </p>
    <p>
      During the time which intervened between the committal and the trial of
      the prisoner, Lord Glenfallen seemed to suffer agonies of mind which
      baffle all description; he hardly ever slept, and when he did, his
      slumbers seemed but the instruments of new tortures, and his waking hours
      were, if possible, exceeded in intensity of terrors by the dreams which
      disturbed his sleep.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lord Glenfallen rested, if to lie in the mere attitude of repose were to
      do so, in his dressing-room, and thus I had an opportunity of witnessing,
      far oftener than I wished it, the fearful workings of his mind. His agony
      often broke out into such fearful paroxysms that delirium and total loss
      of reason appeared to be impending. He frequently spoke of flying from the
      country, and bringing with him all the witnesses of the appalling scene
      upon which the prosecution was founded; then, again, he would fiercely
      lament that the blow which he had inflicted had not ended all.
    </p>
    <p>
      The assizes arrived, however, and upon the day appointed Lord Glenfallen
      and I attended in order to give our evidence.
    </p>
    <p>
      The cause was called on, and the prisoner appeared at the bar.
    </p>
    <p>
      Great curiosity and interest were felt respecting the trial, so that the
      court was crowded to excess.
    </p>
    <p>
      The prisoner, however, without appearing to take the trouble of listening
      to the indictment, pleaded guilty, and no representations on the part of
      the court availed to induce her to retract her plea.
    </p>
    <p>
      After much time had been wasted in a fruitless attempt to prevail upon her
      to reconsider her words, the court proceeded, according to the usual form,
      to pass sentence.
    </p>
    <p>
      This having been done, the prisoner was about to be removed, when she
      said, in a low, distinct voice:
    </p>
    <p>
      'A word&mdash;a word, my lord!&mdash;Is Lord Glenfallen here in the
      court?'
    </p>
    <p>
      On being told that he was, she raised her voice to a tone of loud menace,
      and continued:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Hardress, Earl of Glenfallen, I accuse you here in this court of justice
      of two crimes,&mdash;first, that you married a second wife, while the
      first was living; and again, that you prompted me to the murder, for
      attempting which I am to die. Secure him&mdash;chain him&mdash;bring him
      here.'
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a laugh through the court at these words, which were naturally
      treated by the judge as a violent extemporary recrimination, and the woman
      was desired to be silent.
    </p>
    <p>
      'You won't take him, then?' she said; 'you won't try him? You'll let him
      go free?'
    </p>
    <p>
      It was intimated by the court that he would certainly be allowed 'to go
      free,' and she was ordered again to be removed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Before, however, the mandate was executed, she threw her arms wildly into
      the air, and uttered one piercing shriek so full of preternatural rage and
      despair, that it might fitly have ushered a soul into those realms where
      hope can come no more.
    </p>
    <p>
      The sound still rang in my ears, months after the voice that had uttered
      it was for ever silent.
    </p>
    <p>
      The wretched woman was executed in accordance with the sentence which had
      been pronounced.
    </p>
    <p>
      For some time after this event, Lord Glenfallen appeared, if possible, to
      suffer more than he had done before, and altogether his language, which
      often amounted to half confessions of the guilt imputed to him, and all
      the circumstances connected with the late occurrences, formed a mass of
      evidence so convincing that I wrote to my father, detailing the grounds of
      my fears, and imploring him to come to Cahergillagh without delay, in
      order to remove me from my husband's control, previously to taking legal
      steps for a final separation.
    </p>
    <p>
      Circumstanced as I was, my existence was little short of intolerable, for,
      besides the fearful suspicions which attached to my husband, I plainly
      perceived that if Lord Glenfallen were not relieved, and that speedily,
      insanity must supervene. I therefore expected my father's arrival, or at
      least a letter to announce it, with indescribable impatience.
    </p>
    <p>
      About a week after the execution had taken place, Lord Glenfallen one
      morning met me with an unusually sprightly air.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Fanny,' said he, 'I have it now for the first time in my power to explain
      to your satisfaction everything which has hitherto appeared suspicious or
      mysterious in my conduct. After breakfast come with me to my study, and I
      shall, I hope, make all things clear.'
    </p>
    <p>
      This invitation afforded me more real pleasure than I had experienced for
      months. Something had certainly occurred to tranquillize my husband's mind
      in no ordinary degree, and I thought it by no means impossible that he
      would, in the proposed interview, prove himself the most injured and
      innocent of men.
    </p>
    <p>
      Full of this hope, I repaired to his study at the appointed hour. He was
      writing busily when I entered the room, and just raising his eyes, he
      requested me to be seated.
    </p>
    <p>
      I took a chair as he desired, and remained silently awaiting his leisure,
      while he finished, folded, directed, and sealed his letter. Laying it then
      upon the table with the address downward, he said,
    </p>
    <p>
      'My dearest Fanny, I know I must have appeared very strange to you and
      very unkind&mdash;often even cruel. Before the end of this week I will
      show you the necessity of my conduct&mdash;how impossible it was that I
      should have seemed otherwise. I am conscious that many acts of mine must
      have inevitably given rise to painful suspicions&mdash;suspicions which,
      indeed, upon one occasion, you very properly communicated to me. I have
      got two letters from a quarter which commands respect, containing
      information as to the course by which I may be enabled to prove the
      negative of all the crimes which even the most credulous suspicion could
      lay to my charge. I expected a third by this morning's post, containing
      documents which will set the matter for ever at rest, but owing, no doubt,
      to some neglect, or, perhaps, to some difficulty in collecting the papers,
      some inevitable delay, it has not come to hand this morning, according to
      my expectation. I was finishing one to the very same quarter when you came
      in, and if a sound rousing be worth anything, I think I shall have a
      special messenger before two days have passed. I have been anxiously
      considering with myself, as to whether I had better imperfectly clear up
      your doubts by submitting to your inspection the two letters which I have
      already received, or wait till I can triumphantly vindicate myself by the
      production of the documents which I have already mentioned, and I have, I
      think, not unnaturally decided upon the latter course. However, there is a
      person in the next room whose testimony is not without its value excuse me
      for one moment.'
    </p>
    <p>
      So saying, he arose and went to the door of a closet which opened from the
      study; this he unlocked, and half opening the door, he said, 'It is only
      I,' and then slipped into the room and carefully closed and locked the
      door behind him.
    </p>
    <p>
      I immediately heard his voice in animated conversation. My curiosity upon
      the subject of the letter was naturally great, so, smothering any little
      scruples which I might have felt, I resolved to look at the address of the
      letter which lay, as my husband had left it, with its face upon the table.
      I accordingly drew it over to me and turned up the direction.
    </p>
    <p>
      For two or three moments I could scarce believe my eyes, but there could
      be no mistake&mdash;in large characters were traced the words, 'To the
      Archangel Gabriel in Heaven.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I had scarcely returned the letter to its original position, and in some
      degree recovered the shock which this unequivocal proof of insanity
      produced, when the closet door was unlocked, and Lord Glenfallen
      re-entered the study, carefully closing and locking the door again upon
      the outside.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Whom have you there?' inquired I, making a strong effort to appear calm.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Perhaps,' said he, musingly, 'you might have some objection to seeing
      her, at least for a time.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Who is it?' repeated I.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Why,' said he, 'I see no use in hiding it&mdash;the blind Dutchwoman. I
      have been with her the whole morning. She is very anxious to get out of
      that closet; but you know she is odd, she is scarcely to be trusted.'
    </p>
    <p>
      A heavy gust of wind shook the door at this moment with a sound as if
      something more substantial were pushing against it.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Ha, ha, ha!&mdash;do you hear her?' said he, with an obstreperous burst
      of laughter.
    </p>
    <p>
      The wind died away in a long howl, and Lord Glenfallen, suddenly checking
      his merriment, shrugged his shoulders, and muttered:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Poor devil, she has been hardly used.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'We had better not tease her at present with questions,' said I, in as
      unconcerned a tone as I could assume, although I felt every moment as if I
      should faint.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Humph! may be so,' said he. 'Well, come back in an hour or two, or when
      you please, and you will find us here.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He again unlocked the door, and entered with the same precautions which he
      had adopted before, locking the door upon the inside; and as I hurried
      from the room, I heard his voice again exerted as if in eager parley.
    </p>
    <p>
      I can hardly describe my emotions; my hopes had been raised to the
      highest, and now, in an instant, all was gone&mdash;the dreadful
      consummation was accomplished&mdash;the fearful retribution had fallen
      upon the guilty man&mdash;the mind was destroyed&mdash;the power to repent
      was gone.
    </p>
    <p>
      The agony of the hours which followed what I would still call my AWFUL
      interview with Lord Glenfallen, I cannot describe; my solitude was,
      however, broken in upon by Martha, who came to inform me of the arrival of
      a gentleman, who expected me in the parlour.
    </p>
    <p>
      I accordingly descended, and, to my great joy, found my father seated by
      the fire.
    </p>
    <p>
      This expedition upon his part was easily accounted for: my communications
      had touched the honour of the family. I speedily informed him of the
      dreadful malady which had fallen upon the wretched man.
    </p>
    <p>
      My father suggested the necessity of placing some person to watch him, to
      prevent his injuring himself or others.
    </p>
    <p>
      I rang the bell, and desired that one Edward Cooke, an attached servant of
      the family, should be sent to me.
    </p>
    <p>
      I told him distinctly and briefly the nature of the service required of
      him, and, attended by him, my father and I proceeded at once to the study.
      The door of the inner room was still closed, and everything in the outer
      chamber remained in the same order in which I had left it.
    </p>
    <p>
      We then advanced to the closet-door, at which we knocked, but without
      receiving any answer.
    </p>
    <p>
      We next tried to open the door, but in vain&mdash;it was locked upon the
      inside. We knocked more loudly, but in vain.
    </p>
    <p>
      Seriously alarmed, I desired the servant to force the door, which was,
      after several violent efforts, accomplished, and we entered the closet.
    </p>
    <p>
      Lord Glenfallen was lying on his face upon a sofa.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Hush!' said I, 'he is asleep.' We paused for a moment.
    </p>
    <p>
      'He is too still for that,' said my father.
    </p>
    <p>
      We all of us felt a strong reluctance to approach the figure.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Edward,' said I, 'try whether your master sleeps.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The servant approached the sofa where Lord Glenfallen lay. He leant his
      ear towards the head of the recumbent figure, to ascertain whether the
      sound of breathing was audible. He turned towards us, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'My lady, you had better not wait here; I am sure he is dead!'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Let me see the face,' said I, terribly agitated; 'you MAY be mistaken.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The man then, in obedience to my command, turned the body round, and,
      gracious God! what a sight met my view. He was, indeed, perfectly dead.
    </p>
    <p>
      The whole breast of the shirt, with its lace frill, was drenched with
      gore, as was the couch underneath the spot where he lay.
    </p>
    <p>
      The head hung back, as it seemed, almost severed from the body by a
      frightful gash, which yawned across the throat. The instrument which had
      inflicted it was found under his body.
    </p>
    <p>
      All, then, was over; I was never to learn the history in whose termination
      I had been so deeply and so tragically involved.
    </p>
    <p>
      The severe discipline which my mind had undergone was not bestowed in
      vain. I directed my thoughts and my hopes to that place where there is no
      more sin, nor danger, nor sorrow.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus ends a brief tale whose prominent incidents many will recognise as
      having marked the history of a distinguished family; and though it refers
      to a somewhat distant date, we shall be found not to have taken, upon that
      account, any liberties with the facts, but in our statement of all the
      incidents to have rigorously and faithfully adhered to the truth.
    </p>
    <h2>
      AN ADVENTURE OF HARDRESS FITZGERALD, A ROYALIST CAPTAIN.
    </h2>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     Being an Eleventh Extract from the Legacy of the late
     Francis Purcell, P.P. of Drumcoolagh.
</pre>
    <p>
      The following brief narrative contains a faithful account of one of the
      many strange incidents which chequered the life of Hardress Fitzgerald&mdash;one
      of the now-forgotten heroes who flourished during the most stirring and,
      though the most disastrous, by no means the least glorious period of our
      eventful history.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was a captain of horse in the army of James, and shared the fortunes of
      his master, enduring privations, encountering dangers, and submitting to
      vicissitudes the most galling and ruinous, with a fortitude and a heroism
      which would, if coupled with his other virtues have rendered the unhappy
      monarch whom he served, the most illustrious among unfortunate princes.
    </p>
    <p>
      I have always preferred, where I could do so with any approach to
      accuracy, to give such relations as the one which I am about to submit to
      you, in the first person, and in the words of the original narrator,
      believing that such a form of recitation not only gives freshness to the
      tale, but in this particular instance, by bringing before me and steadily
      fixing in my mind's eye the veteran royalist who himself related the
      occurrence which I am about to record, furnishes an additional stimulant
      to my memory, and a proportionate check upon my imagination.
    </p>
    <p>
      As nearly as I can recollect then, his statement was as follows:
    </p>
    <p>
      After the fatal battle of the Boyne, I came up in disguise to Dublin, as
      did many in a like situation, regarding the capital as furnishing at once
      a good central position of observation, and as secure a lurking-place as I
      cared to find.
    </p>
    <p>
      I would not suffer myself to believe that the cause of my royal master was
      so desperate as it really was; and while I lay in my lodgings, which
      consisted of the garret of a small dark house, standing in the lane which
      runs close by Audoen's Arch, I busied myself with continual projects for
      the raising of the country, and the re-collecting of the fragments of the
      defeated army&mdash;plans, you will allow, sufficiently magnificent for a
      poor devil who dared scarce show his face abroad in the daylight.
    </p>
    <p>
      I believe, however, that I had not much reason to fear for my personal
      safety, for men's minds in the city were greatly occupied with public
      events, and private amusements and debaucheries, which were, about that
      time, carried to an excess which our country never knew before, by reason
      of the raking together from all quarters of the empire, and indeed from
      most parts of Holland, the most dissolute and desperate adventurers who
      cared to play at hazard for their lives; and thus there seemed to be but
      little scrutiny into the characters of those who sought concealment.
    </p>
    <p>
      I heard much at different times of the intentions of King James and his
      party, but nothing with certainty.
    </p>
    <p>
      Some said that the king still lay in Ireland; others, that he had crossed
      over to Scotland, to encourage the Highlanders, who, with Dundee at their
      head, had been stirring in his behoof; others, again, said that he had
      taken ship for France, leaving his followers to shift for themselves, and
      regarding his kingdom as wholly lost, which last was the true version, as
      I afterwards learned.
    </p>
    <p>
      Although I had been very active in the wars in Ireland, and had done many
      deeds of necessary but dire severity, which have often since troubled me
      much to think upon, yet I doubted not but that I might easily obtain
      protection for my person and property from the Prince of Orange, if I
      sought it by the ordinary submissions; but besides that my conscience and
      my affections resisted such time-serving concessions, I was resolved in my
      own mind that the cause of the royalist party was by no means desperate,
      and I looked to keep myself unimpeded by any pledge or promise given to
      the usurping Dutchman, that I might freely and honourably take a share in
      any struggle which might yet remain to be made for the right.
    </p>
    <p>
      I therefore lay quiet, going forth from my lodgings but little, and that
      chiefly under cover of the dusk, and conversing hardly at all, except with
      those whom I well knew.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had like once to have paid dearly for relaxing this caution; for going
      into a tavern one evening near the Tholsel, I had the confidence to throw
      off my hat, and sit there with my face quite exposed, when a fellow coming
      in with some troopers, they fell a-boozing, and being somewhat warmed,
      they began to drink 'Confusion to popery,' and the like, and to compel the
      peaceable persons who happened to sit there, to join them in so doing.
    </p>
    <p>
      Though I was rather hot-blooded, I was resolved to say nothing to attract
      notice; but, at the same time, if urged to pledge the toasts which they
      were compelling others to drink, to resist doing so.
    </p>
    <p>
      With the intent to withdraw myself quietly from the place, I paid my
      reckoning, and putting on my hat, was going into the street, when the
      countryman who had come in with the soldiers called out:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Stop that popish tom-cat!'
    </p>
    <p>
      And running across the room, he got to the door before me, and, shutting
      it, placed his back against it, to prevent my going out.
    </p>
    <p>
      Though with much difficulty, I kept an appearance of quietness, and
      turning to the fellow, who, from his accent, I judged to be northern, and
      whose face I knew&mdash;though, to this day, I cannot say where I had seen
      him before&mdash;I observed very calmly:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Sir, I came in here with no other design than to refresh myself, without
      offending any man. I have paid my reckoning, and now desire to go forth.
      If there is anything within reason that I can do to satisfy you, and to
      prevent trouble and delay to myself, name your terms, and if they be but
      fair, I will frankly comply with them.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He quickly replied:
    </p>
    <p>
      'You are Hardress Fitzgerald, the bloody popish captain, that hanged the
      twelve men at Derry.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I felt that I was in some danger, but being a strong man, and used to
      perils of all kinds, it was not easy to disconcert me.
    </p>
    <p>
      I looked then steadily at the fellow, and, in a voice of much confidence,
      I said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'I am neither a Papist, a Royalist, nor a Fitzgerald, but an honester
      Protestant, mayhap, than many who make louder professions.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Then drink the honest man's toast,' said he. 'Damnation to the pope, and
      confusion to skulking Jimmy and his runaway crew.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Yourself shall hear me,' said I, taking the largest pewter pot that lay
      within my reach. 'Tapster, fill this with ale; I grieve to say I can
      afford nothing better.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I took the vessel of liquor in my hand, and walking up to him, I first
      made a bow to the troopers who sat laughing at the sprightliness of their
      facetious friend, and then another to himself, when saying, 'G&mdash;&mdash;
      damn yourself and your cause!' I flung the ale straight into his face; and
      before he had time to recover himself, I struck him with my whole force
      and weight with the pewter pot upon the head, so strong a blow, that he
      fell, for aught I know, dead upon the floor, and nothing but the handle of
      the vessel remained in my hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      I opened the door, but one of the dragoons drew his sabre, and ran at me
      to avenge his companion. With my hand I put aside the blade of the sword,
      narrowly escaping what he had intended for me, the point actually tearing
      open my vest. Without allowing him time to repeat his thrust, I struck him
      in the face with my clenched fist so sound a blow that he rolled back into
      the room with the force of a tennis ball.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was well for me that the rest were half drunk, and the evening dark;
      for otherwise my folly would infallibly have cost me my life. As it was, I
      reached my garret in safety, with a resolution to frequent taverns no more
      until better times.
    </p>
    <p>
      My little patience and money were wellnigh exhausted, when, after much
      doubt and uncertainty, and many conflicting reports, I was assured that
      the flower of the Royalist army, under the Duke of Berwick and General
      Boisleau, occupied the city of Limerick, with a determination to hold that
      fortress against the prince's forces; and that a French fleet of great
      power, and well freighted with arms, ammunition, and men, was riding in
      the Shannon, under the walls of the town. But this last report was, like
      many others then circulated, untrue; there being, indeed, a promise and
      expectation of such assistance, but no arrival of it till too late.
    </p>
    <p>
      The army of the Prince of Orange was said to be rapidly approaching the
      town, in order to commence the siege.
    </p>
    <p>
      On hearing this, and being made as certain as the vagueness and
      unsatisfactory nature of my information, which came not from any authentic
      source, would permit; at least, being sure of the main point, which all
      allowed&mdash;namely, that Limerick was held for the king&mdash;and being
      also naturally fond of enterprise, and impatient of idleness, I took the
      resolution to travel thither, and, if possible, to throw myself into the
      city, in order to lend what assistance I might to my former companions in
      arms, well knowing that any man of strong constitution and of some
      experience might easily make himself useful to a garrison in their
      straitened situation.
    </p>
    <p>
      When I had taken this resolution, I was not long in putting it into
      execution; and, as the first step in the matter, I turned half of the
      money which remained with me, in all about seventeen pounds, into small
      wares and merchandise such as travelling traders used to deal in; and the
      rest, excepting some shillings which I carried home for my immediate
      expenses, I sewed carefully in the lining of my breeches waistband, hoping
      that the sale of my commodities might easily supply me with subsistence
      upon the road.
    </p>
    <p>
      I left Dublin upon a Friday morning in the month of September, with a
      tolerably heavy pack upon my back.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was a strong man and a good walker, and one day with another travelled
      easily at the rate of twenty miles in each day, much time being lost in
      the towns of any note on the way, where, to avoid suspicion, I was obliged
      to make some stay, as if to sell my wares.
    </p>
    <p>
      I did not travel directly to Limerick, but turned far into Tipperary,
      going near to the borders of Cork.
    </p>
    <p>
      Upon the sixth day after my departure from Dublin I learned, CERTAINLY,
      from some fellows who were returning from trafficking with the soldiers,
      that the army of the prince was actually encamped before Limerick, upon
      the south side of the Shannon.
    </p>
    <p>
      In order, then, to enter the city without interruption, I must needs cross
      the river, and I was much in doubt whether to do so by boat from Kerry,
      which I might have easily done, into the Earl of Clare's land, and thus
      into the beleaguered city, or to take what seemed the easier way, one,
      however, about which I had certain misgivings&mdash;which, by the way,
      afterwards turned out to be just enough. This way was to cross the Shannon
      at O'Brien's Bridge, or at Killaloe, into the county of Clare.
    </p>
    <p>
      I feared, however, that both these passes were guarded by the prince's
      forces, and resolved, if such were the case, not to essay to cross, for I
      was not fitted to sustain a scrutiny, having about me, though pretty
      safely secured, my commission from King James&mdash;which, though a
      dangerous companion, I would not have parted from but with my life.
    </p>
    <p>
      I settled, then, in my own mind, that if the bridges were guarded I would
      walk as far as Portumna, where I might cross, though at a considerable
      sacrifice of time; and, having determined upon this course, I turned
      directly towards Killaloe.
    </p>
    <p>
      I reached the foot of the mountain, or rather high hill, called Keeper&mdash;which
      had been pointed out to me as a landmark&mdash;lying directly between me
      and Killaloe, in the evening, and, having ascended some way, the darkness
      and fog overtook me.
    </p>
    <p>
      The evening was very chilly, and myself weary, hungry, and much in need of
      sleep, so that I preferred seeking to cross the hill, though at some risk,
      to remaining upon it throughout the night. Stumbling over rocks and
      sinking into bog-mire, as the nature of the ground varied, I slowly and
      laboriously plodded on, making very little way in proportion to the toil
      it cost me.
    </p>
    <p>
      After half an hour's slow walking, or rather rambling, for, owing to the
      dark, I very soon lost my direction, I at last heard the sound of running
      water, and with some little trouble reached the edge of a brook, which ran
      in the bottom of a deep gully. This I knew would furnish a sure guide to
      the low grounds, where I might promise myself that I should speedily meet
      with some house or cabin where I might find shelter for the night.
    </p>
    <p>
      The stream which I followed flowed at the bottom of a rough and swampy
      glen, very steep and making many abrupt turns, and so dark, owing more to
      the fog than to the want of the moon (for, though not high, I believe it
      had risen at the time), that I continually fell over fragments of rock and
      stumbled up to my middle into the rivulet, which I sought to follow.
    </p>
    <p>
      In this way, drenched, weary, and with my patience almost exhausted, I was
      toiling onward, when, turning a sharp angle in the winding glen, I found
      myself within some twenty yards of a group of wild-looking men, gathered
      in various attitudes round a glowing turf fire.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was so surprised at this rencontre that I stopped short, and for a time
      was in doubt whether to turn back or to accost them.
    </p>
    <p>
      A minute's thought satisfied me that I ought to make up to the fellows,
      and trust to their good faith for whatever assistance they could give me.
    </p>
    <p>
      I determined, then, to do this, having great faith in the impulses of my
      mind, which, whenever I have been in jeopardy, as in my life I often have,
      always prompted me aright.
    </p>
    <p>
      The strong red light of the fire showed me plainly enough that the group
      consisted, not of soldiers, but of Irish kernes, or countrymen, most of
      them wrapped in heavy mantles, and with no other covering for their heads
      than that afforded by their long, rough hair.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was nothing about them which I could see to intimate whether their
      object were peaceful or warlike; but I afterwards found that they had
      weapons enough, though of their own rude fashion.
    </p>
    <p>
      There were in all about twenty persons assembled around the fire, some
      sitting upon such blocks of stone as happened to lie in the way; others
      stretched at their length upon the ground.
    </p>
    <p>
      'God save you, boys!' said I, advancing towards the party.
    </p>
    <p>
      The men who had been talking and laughing together instantly paused, and
      two of them&mdash;tall and powerful fellows&mdash;snatched up each a
      weapon, something like a short halberd with a massive iron head, an
      instrument which they called among themselves a rapp, and with two or
      three long strides they came up with me, and laying hold upon my arms,
      drew me, not, you may easily believe, making much resistance, towards the
      fire.
    </p>
    <p>
      When I reached the place where the figures were seated, the two men still
      held me firmly, and some others threw some handfuls of dry fuel upon the
      red embers, which, blazing up, cast a strong light upon me.
    </p>
    <p>
      When they had satisfied themselves as to my appearance, they began to
      question me very closely as to my purpose in being upon the hill at such
      an unseasonable hour, asking me what was my occupation, where I had been,
      and whither I was going.
    </p>
    <p>
      These questions were put to me in English by an old half-military looking
      man, who translated into that language the suggestions which his
      companions for the most part threw out in Irish.
    </p>
    <p>
      I did not choose to commit myself to these fellows by telling them my real
      character and purpose, and therefore I represented myself as a poor
      travelling chapman who had been at Cork, and was seeking his way to
      Killaloe, in order to cross over into Clare and thence to the city of
      Galway.
    </p>
    <p>
      My account did not seem fully to satisfy the men.
    </p>
    <p>
      I heard one fellow say in Irish, which language I understood, 'Maybe he is
      a spy.'
    </p>
    <p>
      They then whispered together for a time, and the little man who was their
      spokesman came over to me and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Do you know what we do with spies? we knock their brains out, my friend.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He then turned back to them with whom he had been whispering, and talked
      in a low tone again with them for a considerable time.
    </p>
    <p>
      I now felt very uncomfortable, not knowing what these savages&mdash;for
      they appeared nothing better&mdash;might design against me.
    </p>
    <p>
      Twice or thrice I had serious thoughts of breaking from them, but the two
      guards who were placed upon me held me fast by the arms; and even had I
      succeeded in shaking them off, I should soon have been overtaken,
      encumbered as I was with a heavy pack, and wholly ignorant of the lie of
      the ground; or else, if I were so exceedingly lucky as to escape out of
      their hands, I still had the chance of falling into those of some other
      party of the same kind.
    </p>
    <p>
      I therefore patiently awaited the issue of their deliberations, which I
      made no doubt affected me nearly.
    </p>
    <p>
      I turned to the men who held me, and one after the other asked them, in
      their own language, 'Why they held me?' adding, 'I am but a poor pedlar,
      as you see. I have neither money nor money's worth, for the sake of which
      you should do me hurt. You may have my pack and all that it contains, if
      you desire it&mdash;but do not injure me.'
    </p>
    <p>
      To all this they gave no answer, but savagely desired me to hold my
      tongue.
    </p>
    <p>
      I accordingly remained silent, determined, if the worst came, to declare
      to the whole party, who, I doubted not, were friendly, as were all the
      Irish peasantry in the south, to the Royal cause, my real character and
      design; and if this avowal failed me, I was resolved to make a desperate
      effort to escape, or at least to give my life at the dearest price I
      could.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was not kept long in suspense, for the little veteran who had spoken to
      me at first came over, and desiring the two men to bring me after him, led
      the way along a broken path, which wound by the side of the steep glen.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was obliged willy nilly to go with them, and, half-dragging and
      half-carrying me, they brought me by the path, which now became very
      steep, for some hundred yards without stopping, when suddenly coming to a
      stand, I found myself close before the door of some house or hut, I could
      not see which, through the planks of which a strong light was streaming.
    </p>
    <p>
      At this door my conductor stopped, and tapping gently at it, it was opened
      by a stout fellow, with buff-coat and jack-boots, and pistols stuck in his
      belt, as also a long cavalry sword by his side.
    </p>
    <p>
      He spoke with my guide, and to my no small satisfaction, in French, which
      convinced me that he was one of the soldiers whom Louis had sent to
      support our king, and who were said to have arrived in Limerick, though,
      as I observed above, not with truth.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was much assured by this circumstance, and made no doubt but that I had
      fallen in with one of those marauding parties of native Irish, who,
      placing themselves under the guidance of men of courage and experience,
      had done much brave and essential service to the cause of the king.
    </p>
    <p>
      The soldier entered an inner door in the apartment, which opening
      disclosed a rude, dreary, and dilapidated room, with a low plank ceiling,
      much discoloured by the smoke which hung suspended in heavy masses,
      descending within a few feet of the ground, and completely obscuring the
      upper regions of the chamber.
    </p>
    <p>
      A large fire of turf and heath was burning under a kind of rude chimney,
      shaped like a large funnel, but by no means discharging the functions for
      which it was intended. Into this inauspicious apartment was I conducted by
      my strange companions. In the next room I heard voices employed, as it
      seemed, in brief questioning and answer; and in a minute the soldier
      reentered the room, and having said, 'Votre prisonnier&mdash;le general
      veut le voir,' he led the way into the inner room, which in point of
      comfort and cleanliness was not a whit better than the first.
    </p>
    <p>
      Seated at a clumsy plank table, placed about the middle of the floor, was
      a powerfully built man, of almost colossal stature&mdash;his military
      accoutrements, cuirass and rich regimental clothes, soiled, deranged, and
      spattered with recent hard travel; the flowing wig, surmounted by the
      cocked hat and plume, still rested upon his head. On the table lay his
      sword-belt with its appendage, and a pair of long holster pistols, some
      papers, and pen and ink; also a stone jug, and the fragments of a hasty
      meal. His attitude betokened the languor of fatigue. His left hand was
      buried beyond the lace ruffle in the breast of his cassock, and the elbow
      of his right rested upon the table, so as to support his head. From his
      mouth protruded a tobacco-pipe, which as I entered he slowly withdrew.
    </p>
    <p>
      A single glance at the honest, good-humoured, comely face of the soldier
      satisfied me of his identity, and removing my hat from my head I said,
      'God save General Sarsfield!'
    </p>
    <p>
      The general nodded
    </p>
    <p>
      'I am a prisoner here under strange circumstances,' I continued 'I appear
      before you in a strange disguise. You do not recognise Captain Hardress
      Fitzgerald!'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Eh, how's this?' said he, approaching me with the light.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I am that Hardress Fitzgerald,' I repeated, 'who served under you at the
      Boyne, and upon the day of the action had the honour to protect your
      person at the expense of his own.' At the same time I turned aside the
      hair which covered the scar which you well know upon my forehead, and
      which was then much more remarkable than it is now.
    </p>
    <p>
      The general on seeing this at once recognised me, and embracing me
      cordially, made me sit down, and while I unstrapped my pack, a tedious
      job, my fingers being nearly numbed with cold, sent the men forth to
      procure me some provision.
    </p>
    <p>
      The general's horse was stabled in a corner of the chamber where we sat,
      and his war-saddle lay upon the floor. At the far end of the room was a
      second door, which stood half open; a bogwood fire burned on a hearth
      somewhat less rude than the one which I had first seen, but still very
      little better appointed with a chimney, for thick wreaths of smoke were
      eddying, with every fitful gust, about the room. Close by the fire was
      strewed a bed of heath, intended, I supposed, for the stalwart limbs of
      the general.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Hardress Fitzgerald,' said he, fixing his eyes gravely upon me, while he
      slowly removed the tobacco-pipe from his mouth, 'I remember you, strong,
      bold and cunning in your warlike trade; the more desperate an enterprise,
      the more ready for it, you. I would gladly engage you, for I know you
      trustworthy, to perform a piece of duty requiring, it may be, no
      extraordinary quality to fulfil; and yet perhaps, as accidents may happen,
      demanding every attribute of daring and dexterity which belongs to you.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Here he paused for some moments.
    </p>
    <p>
      I own I felt somewhat flattered by the terms in which he spoke of me,
      knowing him to be but little given to compliments; and not having any plan
      in my head, farther than the rendering what service I might to the cause
      of the king, caring very little as to the road in which my duty might lie,
      I frankly replied:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Sir, I hope, if opportunity offers, I shall prove to deserve the
      honourable terms in which you are pleased to speak of me. In a righteous
      cause I fear not wounds or death; and in discharging my duty to my God and
      my king, I am ready for any hazard or any fate. Name the service you
      require, and if it lies within the compass of my wit or power, I will
      fully and faithfully perform it. Have I said enough?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'That is well, very well, my friend; you speak well, and manfully,'
      replied the general. 'I want you to convey to the hands of General
      Boisleau, now in the city of Limerick, a small written packet; there is
      some danger, mark me, of your falling in with some outpost or straggling
      party of the prince's army. If you are taken unawares by any of the enemy
      you must dispose of the packet inside your person, rather than let it fall
      into their hands&mdash;that is, you must eat it. And if they go to
      question you with thumbscrews, or the like, answer nothing; let them knock
      your brains out first.' In illustration, I suppose, of the latter
      alternative, he knocked the ashes out of his pipe upon the table as he
      uttered it.
    </p>
    <p>
      'The packet,' he continued, 'you shall have to-morrow morning. Meantime
      comfort yourself with food, and afterwards with sleep; you will want,
      mayhap, all your strength and wits on the morrow.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I applied myself forthwith to the homely fare which they had provided, and
      I confess that I never made a meal so heartily to my satisfaction.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was a beautiful, clear, autumn morning, and the bright beams of the
      early sun were slanting over the brown heath which clothed the sides of
      the mountain, and glittering in the thousand bright drops which the
      melting hoar-frost had left behind it, and the white mists were lying like
      broad lakes in the valleys, when, with my pedlar's pack upon my back, and
      General Sarsfield's precious despatch in my bosom, I set forth, refreshed
      and courageous.
    </p>
    <p>
      As I descended the hill, my heart expanded and my spirits rose under the
      influences which surrounded me. The keen, clear, bracing air of the
      morning, the bright, slanting sunshine, the merry songs of the small
      birds, and the distant sounds of awakening labour that floated up from the
      plains, all conspired to stir my heart within me, and more like a mad-cap
      boy, broken loose from school, than a man of sober years upon a mission of
      doubt and danger, I trod lightly on, whistling and singing alternately for
      very joy.
    </p>
    <p>
      As I approached the object of my early march, I fell in with a countryman,
      eager, as are most of his kind, for news.
    </p>
    <p>
      I gave him what little I had collected, and professing great zeal for the
      king, which, indeed, I always cherished, I won upon his confidence so far,
      that he became much more communicative than the peasantry in those
      quarters are generally wont to be to strangers.
    </p>
    <p>
      From him I learned that there was a company of dragoons in William's
      service, quartered at Willaloe; but he could not tell whether the passage
      of the bridge was stopped by them or not. With a resolution, at all
      events, to make the attempt to cross, I approached the town. When I came
      within sight of the river, I quickly perceived that it was so swollen with
      the recent rains, as, indeed, the countryman had told me, that the fords
      were wholly impassable.
    </p>
    <p>
      I stopped then, upon a slight eminence overlooking the village, with a
      view to reconnoitre and to arrange my plans in case of interruption. While
      thus engaged, the wind blowing gently from the west, in which quarter
      Limerick lay, I distinctly heard the explosion of the cannon, which played
      from and against the city, though at a distance of eleven miles at the
      least.
    </p>
    <p>
      I never yet heard the music that had for me half the attractions of that
      sullen sound, and as I noted again and again the distant thunder that
      proclaimed the perils, and the valour, and the faithfulness of my
      brethren, my heart swelled with pride, and the tears rose to my eyes; and
      lifting up my hands to heaven, I prayed to God that I might be spared to
      take a part in the righteous quarrel that was there so bravely maintained.
    </p>
    <p>
      I felt, indeed, at this moment a longing, more intense than I have the
      power to describe, to be at once with my brave companions in arms, and so
      inwardly excited and stirred up as if I had been actually within five
      minutes' march of the field of battle.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was now almost noon, and I had walked hard since morning across a
      difficult and broken country, so that I was a little fatigued, and in no
      small degree hungry. As I approached the hamlet, I was glad to see in the
      window of a poor hovel several large cakes of meal displayed, as if to
      induce purchasers to enter.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was right in regarding this exhibition as an intimation that
      entertainment might be procured within, for upon entering and inquiring, I
      was speedily invited by the poor woman, who, it appeared, kept this humble
      house of refreshment, to lay down my pack and seat myself by a ponderous
      table, upon which she promised to serve me with a dinner fit for a king;
      and indeed, to my mind, she amply fulfilled her engagement, supplying me
      abundantly with eggs, bacon, and wheaten cakes, which I discussed with a
      zeal which almost surprised myself.
    </p>
    <p>
      Having disposed of the solid part of my entertainment, I was proceeding to
      regale myself with a brimming measure of strong waters, when my attention
      was arrested by the sound of horses' hoofs in brisk motion upon the broken
      road, and evidently approaching the hovel in which I was at that moment
      seated.
    </p>
    <p>
      The ominous clank of sword scabbards and the jingle of brass accoutrements
      announced, unequivocally, that the horsemen were of the military
      profession.
    </p>
    <p>
      'The red-coats will stop here undoubtedly,' said the old woman, observing,
      I suppose, the anxiety of my countenance; 'they never pass us without
      coming in for half an hour to drink or smoke. If you desire to avoid them,
      I can hide you safely; but don't lose a moment. They will be here before
      you can count a hundred.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I thanked the good woman for her hospitable zeal; but I felt a repugnance
      to concealing myself as she suggested, which was enhanced by the
      consciousness that if by any accident I were detected while lurking in the
      room, my situation would of itself inevitably lead to suspicions, and
      probably to discovery.
    </p>
    <p>
      I therefore declined her offer, and awaited in suspense the entrance of
      the soldiers.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had time before they made their appearance to move my seat hurriedly
      from the table to the hearth, where, under the shade of the large chimney,
      I might observe the coming visitors with less chance of being myself
      remarked upon.
    </p>
    <p>
      As my hostess had anticipated, the horsemen drew up at the door of the
      hut, and five dragoons entered the dark chamber where I awaited them.
    </p>
    <p>
      Leaving their horses at the entrance, with much noise and clatter they
      proceeded to seat themselves and call for liquor.
    </p>
    <p>
      Three of these fellows were Dutchmen, and, indeed, all belonged, as I
      afterwards found, to a Dutch regiment, which had been recruited with Irish
      and English, as also partly officered from the same nations.
    </p>
    <p>
      Being supplied with pipes and drink they soon became merry; and not
      suffering their smoking to interfere with their conversation, they talked
      loud and quickly, for the most part in a sort of barbarous language,
      neither Dutch nor English, but compounded of both.
    </p>
    <p>
      They were so occupied with their own jocularity that I had very great
      hopes of escaping observation altogether, and remained quietly seated in a
      corner of the chimney, leaning back upon my seat as if asleep.
    </p>
    <p>
      My taciturnity and quiescence, however, did not avail me, for one of these
      fellows coming over to the hearth to light his pipe, perceived me, and
      looking me very hard in the face, he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'What countryman are you, brother, that you sit with a covered head in the
      room with the prince's soldiers?'
    </p>
    <p>
      At the same time he tossed my hat off my head into the fire. I was not
      fool enough, though somewhat hot-blooded, to suffer the insolence of this
      fellow to involve me in a broil so dangerous to my person and ruinous to
      my schemes as a riot with these soldiers must prove. I therefore, quietly
      taking up my hat and shaking the ashes out of it, observed:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Sir, I crave your pardon if I have offended you. I am a stranger in these
      quarters, and a poor, ignorant, humble man, desiring only to drive my
      little trade in peace, so far as that may be done in these troublous
      times.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'And what may your trade be?' said the same fellow.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I am a travelling merchant,' I replied; 'and sell my wares as cheap as
      any trader in the country.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Let us see them forthwith,' said he; 'mayhap I or my comrades may want
      something which you can supply. Where is thy chest, friend? Thou shalt
      have ready money' (winking at his companions), 'ready money, and good
      weight, and sound metal; none of your rascally pinchbeck. Eh, my lads?
      Bring forth the goods, and let us see.'
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus urged, I should have betrayed myself had I hesitated to do as
      required; and anxious, upon any terms, to quiet these turbulent men of
      war, I unbuckled my pack and exhibited its contents upon the table before
      them.
    </p>
    <p>
      'A pair of lace ruffles, by the Lord!' said one, unceremoniously seizing
      upon the articles he named.
    </p>
    <p>
      'A phial of perfume,' continued another, tumbling over the farrago which I
      had submitted to them, 'wash-balls, combs, stationery, slippers, small
      knives, tobacco; by &mdash;&mdash;, this merchant is a prize! Mark me,
      honest fellow, the man who wrongs thee shall suffer&mdash;'fore Gad he
      shall; thou shalt be fairly dealt with' (this he said while in the act of
      pocketing a small silver tobacco-box, the most valuable article in the
      lot). 'You shall come with me to head-quarters; the captain will deal with
      you, and never haggle about the price. I promise thee his good will, and
      thou wilt consider me accordingly. You'll find him a profitable customer&mdash;he
      has money without end, and throws it about like a gentleman. If so be as I
      tell thee, I shall expect, and my comrades here, a piece or two in the way
      of a compliment&mdash;but of this anon. Come, then, with us; buckle on thy
      pack quickly, friend.'
    </p>
    <p>
      There was no use in my declaring my willingness to deal with themselves in
      preference to their master; it was clear that they had resolved that I
      should, in the most expeditious and advantageous way, turn my goods into
      money, that they might excise upon me to the amount of their wishes.
    </p>
    <p>
      The worthy who had taken a lead in these arrangements, and who by his
      stripes I perceived to be a corporal, having insisted on my taking a dram
      with him to cement our newly-formed friendship, for which, however, he
      requested me to pay, made me mount behind one of his comrades; and the
      party, of which I thus formed an unwilling member, moved at a slow trot
      towards the quarters of the troop.
    </p>
    <p>
      They reined up their horses at the head of the long bridge, which at this
      village spans the broad waters of the Shannon connecting the opposite
      counties of Tipperary and Clare.
    </p>
    <p>
      A small tower, built originally, no doubt, to protect and to defend this
      pass, occupied the near extremity of the bridge, and in its rear, but
      connected with it, stood several straggling buildings rather dilapidated.
    </p>
    <p>
      A dismounted trooper kept guard at the door, and my conductor having,
      dismounted, as also the corporal, the latter inquired:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Is the captain in his quarters?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'He is,' replied the sentinel.
    </p>
    <p>
      And without more ado my companion shoved me into the entrance of the small
      dark tower, and opening a door at the extremity of the narrow chamber into
      which we had passed from the street, we entered a second room in which
      were seated some half-dozen officers of various ranks and ages, engaged in
      drinking, and smoking, and play.
    </p>
    <p>
      I glanced rapidly from man to man, and was nearly satisfied by my
      inspection, when one of the gentlemen whose back had been turned towards
      the place where I stood, suddenly changed his position and looked towards
      me.
    </p>
    <p>
      As soon as I saw his face my heart sank within me, and I knew that my life
      or death was balanced, as it were, upon a razor's edge.
    </p>
    <p>
      The name of this man whose unexpected appearance thus affected me was Hugh
      Oliver, and good and strong reason had I to dread him, for so bitterly did
      he hate me, that to this moment I do verily believe he would have
      compassed my death if it lay in his power to do so, even at the hazard of
      his own life and soul, for I had been&mdash;though God knows with many
      sore strugglings and at the stern call of public duty&mdash;the judge and
      condemner of his brother; and though the military law, which I was called
      upon to administer, would permit no other course or sentence than the
      bloody one which I was compelled to pursue, yet even to this hour the
      recollection of that deed is heavy at my breast.
    </p>
    <p>
      As soon as I saw this man I felt that my safety depended upon the accident
      of his not recognising me through the disguise which I had assumed, an
      accident against which were many chances, for he well knew my person and
      appearance.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was too late now to destroy General Sarsfield's instructions; any
      attempt to do so would ensure detection. All then depended upon a cast of
      the die.
    </p>
    <p>
      When the first moment of dismay and heart-sickening agitation had passed,
      it seemed to me as if my mind acquired a collectedness and clearness more
      complete and intense than I had ever experienced before.
    </p>
    <p>
      I instantly perceived that he did not know me, for turning from me to the
      soldier with all air of indifference, he said,
    </p>
    <p>
      'Is this a prisoner or a deserter? What have you brought him here for,
      sirra?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Your wisdom will regard him as you see fit, may it please you,' said the
      corporal. 'The man is a travelling merchant, and, overtaking him upon the
      road, close by old Dame MacDonagh's cot, I thought I might as well make a
      sort of prisoner of him that your honour might use him as it might appear
      most convenient; he has many commododies which are not unworthy of price
      in this wilderness, and some which you may condescend to make use of
      yourself. May he exhibit the goods he has for sale, an't please you?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Ay, let us see them,' said he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Unbuckle your pack,' exclaimed the corporal, with the same tone of
      command with which, at the head of his guard, he would have said 'Recover
      your arms.' 'Unbuckle your pack, fellow, and show your goods to the
      captain&mdash;here, where you are.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The conclusion of his directions was suggested by my endeavouring to move
      round in order to get my back towards the windows, hoping, by keeping my
      face in the shade, to escape detection.
    </p>
    <p>
      In this manoeuvre, however, I was foiled by the imperiousness of the
      soldier; and inwardly cursing his ill-timed interference, I proceeded to
      present my merchandise to the loving contemplation of the officers who
      thronged around me, with a strong light from an opposite window full upon
      my face.
    </p>
    <p>
      As I continued to traffic with these gentlemen, I observed with no small
      anxiety the eyes of Captain Oliver frequently fixed upon me with a kind of
      dubious inquiring gaze.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I think, my honest fellow,' he said at last, 'that I have seen you
      somewhere before this. Have you often dealt with the military?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I have traded, sir,' said I, 'with the soldiery many a time, and always
      been honourably treated. Will your worship please to buy a pair of lace
      ruffles?&mdash;very cheap, your worship.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Why do you wear your hair so much over your face, sir?' said Oliver,
      without noticing my suggestion. 'I promise you, I think no good of thee;
      throw back your hair, and let me see thee plainly. Hold up your face, and
      look straight at me; throw back your hair, sir.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I felt that all chance of escape was at an end; and stepping forward as
      near as the table would allow me to him, I raised my head, threw back my
      hair, and fixed my eyes sternly and boldly upon his face.
    </p>
    <p>
      I saw that he knew me instantly, for his countenance turned as pale as
      ashes with surprise and hatred. He started up, placing his hand
      instinctively upon his sword-hilt, and glaring at me with a look so
      deadly, that I thought every moment he would strike his sword into my
      heart. He said in a kind of whisper: 'Hardress Fitzgerald?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Yes;' said I, boldly, for the excitement of the scene had effectually
      stirred my blood, 'Hardress Fitzgerald is before you. I know you well,
      Captain Oliver. I know how you hate me. I know how you thirst for my
      blood; but in a good cause, and in the hands of God, I defy you.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'You are a desperate villain, sir,' said Captain Oliver; 'a rebel and a
      murderer! Holloa, there! guard, seize him!'
    </p>
    <p>
      As the soldiers entered, I threw my eyes hastily round the room, and
      observing a glowing fire upon the hearth, I suddenly drew General
      Sarsfield's packet from my bosom, and casting it upon the embers, planted
      my foot upon it.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Secure the papers!' shouted the captain; and almost instantly I was laid
      prostrate and senseless upon the floor, by a blow from the butt of a
      carbine.
    </p>
    <p>
      I cannot say how long I continued in a state of torpor; but at length,
      having slowly recovered my senses, I found myself lying firmly handcuffed
      upon the floor of a small chamber, through a narrow loophole in one of
      whose walls the evening sun was shining. I was chilled with cold and damp,
      and drenched in blood, which had flowed in large quantities from the wound
      on my head. By a strong effort I shook off the sick drowsiness which still
      hung upon me, and, weak and giddy, I rose with pain and difficulty to my
      feet.
    </p>
    <p>
      The chamber, or rather cell, in which I stood was about eight feet square,
      and of a height very disproportioned to its other dimensions; its altitude
      from the floor to the ceiling being not less than twelve or fourteen feet.
      A narrow slit placed high in the wall admitted a scanty light, but
      sufficient to assure me that my prison contained nothing to render the
      sojourn of its tenant a whit less comfortless than my worst enemy could
      have wished.
    </p>
    <p>
      My first impulse was naturally to examine the security of the door, the
      loop-hole which I have mentioned being too high and too narrow to afford a
      chance of escape. I listened attentively to ascertain if possible whether
      or not a guard had been placed upon the outside.
    </p>
    <p>
      Not a sound was to be heard. I now placed my shoulder to the door, and
      sought with all my combined strength and weight to force it open. It,
      however, resisted all my efforts, and thus baffled in my appeal to mere
      animal power, exhausted and disheartened, I threw myself on the ground.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was not in my nature, however, long to submit to the apathy of despair,
      and in a few minutes I was on my feet again.
    </p>
    <p>
      With patient scrutiny I endeavoured to ascertain the nature of the
      fastenings which secured the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      The planks, fortunately, having been nailed together fresh, had shrunk
      considerably, so as to leave wide chinks between each and its neighbour.
    </p>
    <p>
      By means of these apertures I saw that my dungeon was secured, not by a
      lock, as I had feared, but by a strong wooden bar, running horizontally
      across the door, about midway upon the outside.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Now,' thought I, 'if I can but slip my fingers through the opening of the
      planks, I can easily remove the bar, and then&mdash;&mdash;'
    </p>
    <p>
      My attempts, however, were all frustrated by the manner in which my hands
      were fastened together, each embarrassing the other, and rendering my
      efforts so hopelessly clumsy, that I was obliged to give them over in
      despair.
    </p>
    <p>
      I turned with a sigh from my last hope, and began to pace my narrow prison
      floor, when my eye suddenly encountered an old rusty nail or holdfast
      sticking in the wall.
    </p>
    <p>
      All the gold of Plutus would not have been so welcome as that rusty piece
      of iron.
    </p>
    <p>
      I instantly wrung it from the wall, and inserting the point between the
      planks of the door into the bolt, and working it backwards and forwards, I
      had at length the unspeakable satisfaction to perceive that the beam was
      actually yielding to my efforts, and gradually sliding into its berth in
      the wall.
    </p>
    <p>
      I have often been engaged in struggles where great bodily strength was
      required, and every thew and sinew in the system taxed to the uttermost;
      but, strange as it may appear, I never was so completely exhausted and
      overcome by any labour as by this comparatively trifling task.
    </p>
    <p>
      Again and again was I obliged to desist, until my cramped finger-joints
      recovered their power; but at length my perseverance was rewarded, for,
      little by little, I succeeded in removing the bolt so far as to allow the
      door to open sufficiently to permit me to pass.
    </p>
    <p>
      With some squeezing I succeeded in forcing my way into a small passage,
      upon which my prison-door opened.
    </p>
    <p>
      This led into a chamber somewhat more spacious than my cell, but still
      containing no furniture, and affording no means of escape to one so
      crippled with bonds as I was.
    </p>
    <p>
      At the far extremity of this room was a door which stood ajar, and,
      stealthily passing through it, I found myself in a room containing nothing
      but a few raw hides, which rendered the atmosphere nearly intolerable.
    </p>
    <p>
      Here I checked myself, for I heard voices in busy conversation in the next
      room.
    </p>
    <p>
      I stole softly to the door which separated the chamber in which I stood
      from that from which the voices proceeded.
    </p>
    <p>
      A moment served to convince me that any attempt upon it would be worse
      than fruitless, for it was secured upon the outside by a strong lock,
      besides two bars, all which I was enabled to ascertain by means of the
      same defect in the joining of the planks which I have mentioned as
      belonging to the inner door.
    </p>
    <p>
      I had approached this door very softly, so that, my proximity being wholly
      unsuspected by the speakers within, the conversation continued without
      interruption.
    </p>
    <p>
      Planting myself close to the door, I applied my eye to one of the chinks
      which separated the boards, and thus obtained a full view of the chamber
      and its occupants.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was the very apartment into which I had been first conducted. The outer
      door, which faced the one at which I stood, was closed, and at a small
      table were seated the only tenants of the room&mdash;two officers, one of
      whom was Captain Oliver. The latter was reading a paper, which I made no
      doubt was the document with which I had been entrusted.
    </p>
    <p>
      'The fellow deserves it, no doubt' said the junior officer. 'But,
      methinks, considering our orders from head-quarters, you deal somewhat too
      hastily.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Nephew, nephew,' said Captain Oliver, 'you mistake the tenor of our
      orders. We were directed to conciliate the peasantry by fair and gentle
      treatment, but not to suffer spies and traitors to escape. This packet is
      of some value, though not, in all its parts, intelligible to me. The
      bearer has made his way hither under a disguise, which, along with the
      other circumstances of his appearance here, is sufficient to convict him
      as a spy.'
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a pause here, and after a few minutes the younger officer said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Spy is a hard term, no doubt, uncle; but it is possible&mdash;nay,
      likely, that this poor devil sought merely to carry the parcel with which
      he was charged in safety to its destination. Pshaw! he is sufficiently
      punished if you duck him, for ten minutes or so, between the bridge and
      the mill-dam.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Young man,' said Oliver, somewhat sternly, 'do not obtrude your advice
      where it is not called for; this man, for whom you plead, murdered your
      own father!'
    </p>
    <p>
      I could not see how this announcement affected the person to whom it was
      addressed, for his back was towards me; but I conjectured, easily, that my
      last poor chance was gone, for a long silence ensued. Captain Oliver at
      length resumed:
    </p>
    <p>
      'I know the villain well. I know him capable of any crime; but, by &mdash;&mdash;,
      his last card is played, and the game is up. He shall not see the moon
      rise to-night.'
    </p>
    <p>
      There was here another pause.
    </p>
    <p>
      Oliver rose, and going to the outer door, called:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Hewson! Hewson!'
    </p>
    <p>
      A grim-looking corporal entered.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Hewson, have your guard ready at eight o'clock, with their carbines
      clean, and a round of ball-cartridge each. Keep them sober; and, further,
      plant two upright posts at the near end of the bridge, with a cross one at
      top, in the manner of a gibbet. See to these matters, Hewson: I shall be
      with you speedily.'
    </p>
    <p>
      The corporal made his salutations, and retired.
    </p>
    <p>
      Oliver deliberately folded up the papers with which I had been
      commissioned, and placing them in the pocket of his vest, he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Cunning, cunning Master Hardress Fitzgerald hath made a false step; the
      old fox is in the toils. Hardress Fitzgerald, Hardress Fitzgerald, I will
      blot you out.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He repeated these words several times, at the same time rubbing his finger
      strongly upon the table, as if he sought to erase a stain:
    </p>
    <p>
      'I WILL BLOT YOU OUT!'
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a kind of glee in his manner and expression which chilled my
      very heart.
    </p>
    <p>
      'You shall be first shot like a dog, and then hanged like a dog: shot
      to-night, and hung to-morrow; hung at the bridgehead&mdash;hung, until
      your bones drop asunder!'
    </p>
    <p>
      It is impossible to describe the exultation with which he seemed to dwell
      upon, and to particularise the fate which he intended for me.
    </p>
    <p>
      I observed, however, that his face was deadly pale, and felt assured that
      his conscience and inward convictions were struggling against his cruel
      resolve. Without further comment the two officers left the room, I suppose
      to oversee the preparations which were being made for the deed of which I
      was to be the victim.
    </p>
    <p>
      A chill, sick horror crept over me as they retired, and I felt, for the
      moment, upon the brink of swooning. This feeling, however, speedily gave
      place to a sensation still more terrible. A state of excitement so intense
      and tremendous as to border upon literal madness, supervened; my brain
      reeled and throbbed as if it would burst; thoughts the wildest and the
      most hideous flashed through my mind with a spontaneous rapidity that
      scared my very soul; while, all the time, I felt a strange and frightful
      impulse to burst into uncontrolled laughter.
    </p>
    <p>
      Gradually this fearful paroxysm passed away. I kneeled and prayed
      fervently, and felt comforted and assured; but still I could not view the
      slow approaches of certain death without an agitation little short of
      agony.
    </p>
    <p>
      I have stood in battle many a time when the chances of escape were
      fearfully small. I have confronted foemen in the deadly breach. I have
      marched, with a constant heart, against the cannon's mouth. Again and
      again has the beast which I bestrode been shot under me; again and again
      have I seen the comrades who walked beside me in an instant laid for ever
      in the dust; again and again have I been in the thick of battle, and of
      its mortal dangers, and never felt my heart shake, or a single nerve
      tremble: but now, helpless, manacled, imprisoned, doomed, forced to watch
      the approaches of an inevitable fate&mdash;to wait, silent and moveless,
      while death as it were crept towards me, human nature was taxed to the
      uttermost to bear the horrible situation.
    </p>
    <p>
      I returned again to the closet in which I had found myself upon recovering
      from the swoon.
    </p>
    <p>
      The evening sunshine and twilight was fast melting into darkness, when I
      heard the outer door, that which communicated with the guard-room in which
      the officers had been amusing themselves, opened and locked again upon the
      inside.
    </p>
    <p>
      A measured step then approached, and the door of the wretched cell in
      which I lay being rudely pushed open, a soldier entered, who carried
      something in his hand; but, owing to the obscurity of the place, I could
      not see what.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Art thou awake, fellow?' said he, in a gruff voice. 'Stir thyself; get
      upon thy legs.'
    </p>
    <p>
      His orders were enforced by no very gentle application of his military
      boot.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Friend,' said I, rising with difficulty, 'you need not insult a dying
      man. You have been sent hither to conduct me to death. Lead on! My trust
      is in God, that He will forgive me my sins, and receive my soul, redeemed
      by the blood of His Son.'
    </p>
    <p>
      There here intervened a pause of some length, at the end of which the
      soldier said, in the same gruff voice, but in a lower key:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Look ye, comrade, it will be your own fault if you die this night. On one
      condition I promise to get you out of this hobble with a whole skin; but
      if you go to any of your d&mdash;&mdash;d gammon, by G&mdash;, before two
      hours are passed, you will have as many holes in your carcase as a
      target.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Name your conditions,' said I, 'and if they consist with honour, I will
      never balk at the offer.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Here they are: you are to be shot to-night, by Captain Oliver's orders.
      The carbines are cleaned for the job, and the cartridges served out to the
      men. By G&mdash;, I tell you the truth!'
    </p>
    <p>
      Of this I needed not much persuasion, and intimated to the man my
      conviction that he spoke the truth.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, then,' he continued, 'now for the means of avoiding this ugly
      business. Captain Oliver rides this night to head-quarters, with the
      papers which you carried. Before he starts he will pay you a visit, to
      fish what he can out of you with all the fine promises he can make. Humour
      him a little, and when you find an opportunity, stab him in the throat
      above the cuirass.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'A feasible plan, surely,' said I, raising my shackled hands, 'for a man
      thus completely crippled and without a weapon.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I will manage all that presently for you,' said the soldier. 'When you
      have thus dealt with him, take his cloak and hat, and so forth, and put
      them on; the papers you will find in the pocket of his vest, in a red
      leather case. Walk boldly out. I am appointed to ride with Captain Oliver,
      and you will find me holding his horse and my own by the door. Mount
      quickly, and I will do the same, and then we will ride for our lives
      across the bridge. You will find the holster-pistols loaded in case of
      pursuit; and, with the devil's help, we shall reach Limerick without a
      hair hurt. My only condition is, that when you strike Oliver, you strike
      home, and again and again, until he is FINISHED; and I trust to your
      honour to remember me when we reach the town.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I cannot say whether I resolved right or wrong, but I thought my
      situation, and the conduct of Captain Oliver, warranted me in acceding to
      the conditions propounded by my visitant, and with alacrity I told him so,
      and desired him to give me the power, as he had promised to do, of
      executing them.
    </p>
    <p>
      With speed and promptitude he drew a small key from his pocket, and in an
      instant the manacles were removed from my hands.
    </p>
    <p>
      How my heart bounded within me as my wrists were released from the iron
      gripe of the shackles! The first step toward freedom was made&mdash;my
      self-reliance returned, and I felt assured of success.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Now for the weapon,' said I.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I fear me, you will find it rather clumsy,' said he; 'but if well
      handled, it will do as well as the best Toledo. It is the only thing I
      could get, but I sharpened it myself; it has an edge like a skean.'
    </p>
    <p>
      He placed in my hand the steel head of a halberd. Grasping it firmly, I
      found that it made by no means a bad weapon in point of convenience; for
      it felt in the hand like a heavy dagger, the portion which formed the
      blade or point being crossed nearly at the lower extremity by a small bar
      of metal, at one side shaped into the form of an axe, and at the other
      into that of a hook. These two transverse appendages being muffled by the
      folds of my cravat, which I removed for the purpose, formed a perfect
      guard or hilt, and the lower extremity formed like a tube, in which the
      pike-handle had been inserted, afforded ample space for the grasp of my
      hand; the point had been made as sharp as a needle, and the metal he
      assured me was good.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus equipped he left me, having observed, 'The captain sent me to bring
      you to your senses, and give you some water that he might find you proper
      for his visit. Here is the pitcher; I think I have revived you
      sufficiently for the captain's purpose.'
    </p>
    <p>
      With a low savage laugh he left me to my reflections.
    </p>
    <p>
      Having examined and adjusted the weapon, I carefully bound the ends of the
      cravat, with which I had secured the cross part of the spear-head, firmly
      round my wrist, so that in case of a struggle it might not easily be
      forced from my hand; and having made these precautionary dispositions, I
      sat down upon the ground with my back against the wall, and my hands
      together under my coat, awaiting my visitor.
    </p>
    <p>
      The time wore slowly on; the dusk became dimmer and dimmer, until it
      nearly bordered on total darkness.
    </p>
    <p>
      'How's this?' said I, inwardly; 'Captain Oliver, you said I should not see
      the moon rise to-night. Methinks you are somewhat tardy in fulfilling your
      prophecy.'
    </p>
    <p>
      As I made this reflection, a noise at the outer door announced the
      entrance of a visitant. I knew that the decisive moment was come, and
      letting my head sink upon my breast, and assuring myself that my hands
      were concealed, I waited, in the attitude of deep dejection, the approach
      of my foe and betrayer.
    </p>
    <p>
      As I had expected, Captain Oliver entered the room where I lay. He was
      equipped for instant duty, as far as the imperfect twilight would allow me
      to see; the long sword clanked upon the floor as he made his way through
      the lobbies which led to my place of confinement; his ample military cloak
      hung upon his arm; his cocked hat was upon his head, and in all points he
      was prepared for the road.
    </p>
    <p>
      This tallied exactly with what my strange informant had told me.
    </p>
    <p>
      I felt my heart swell and my breath come thick as the awful moment which
      was to witness the death-struggle of one or other of us approached.
    </p>
    <p>
      Captain Oliver stood within a yard or two of the place where I sat, or
      rather lay; and folding his arms, he remained silent for a minute or two,
      as if arranging in his mind how he should address me.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Hardress Fitzgerald,' he began at length, 'are you awake? Stand up, if
      you desire to hear of matters nearly touching your life or death. Get up,
      I say.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I arose doggedly, and affecting the awkward movements of one whose hands
      were bound,
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well,' said I, 'what would you of me? Is it not enough that I am thus
      imprisoned without a cause, and about, as I suspect, to suffer a most
      unjust and violent sentence, but must I also be disturbed during the few
      moments left me for reflection and repentance by the presence of my
      persecutor? What do you want of me?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'As to your punishment, sir,' said he, 'your own deserts have no doubt
      suggested the likelihood of it to your mind; but I now am with you to let
      you know that whatever mitigation of your sentence you may look for, must
      be earned by your compliance with my orders. You must frankly and fully
      explain the contents of the packet which you endeavoured this day to
      destroy; and further, you must tell all that you know of the designs of
      the popish rebels.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'And if I do this I am to expect a mitigation of my punishment&mdash;is it
      not so?'
    </p>
    <p>
      Oliver bowed.
    </p>
    <p>
      'And what IS this mitigation to be? On the honour of a soldier, what is it
      to be?' inquired I.
    </p>
    <p>
      'When you have made the disclosure required,' he replied, 'you shall hear.
      'Tis then time to talk of indulgences.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Methinks it would then be too late,' answered I. 'But a chance is a
      chance, and a drowning man will catch at a straw. You are an honourable
      man, Captain Oliver. I must depend, I suppose, on your good faith. Well,
      sir, before I make the desired communication I have one question more to
      put. What is to befall me in case that I, remembering the honour of a
      soldier and a gentleman, reject your infamous terms, scorn your
      mitigations, and defy your utmost power?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'In that case,' replied he, coolly, 'before half an hour you shall be a
      corpse.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Then God have mercy on your soul!' said I; and springing forward, I
      dashed the weapon which I held at his throat.
    </p>
    <p>
      I missed my aim, but struck him full in the mouth with such force that
      most of his front teeth were dislodged, and the point of the spear-head
      passed out under his jaw, at the ear.
    </p>
    <p>
      My onset was so sudden and unexpected that he reeled back to the wall, and
      did not recover his equilibrium in time to prevent my dealing a second
      blow, which I did with my whole force. The point unfortunately struck the
      cuirass, near the neck, and glancing aside it inflicted but a flesh wound,
      tearing the skin and tendons along the throat.
    </p>
    <p>
      He now grappled with me, strange to say, without uttering any cry of
      alarm; being a very powerful man, and if anything rather heavier and more
      strongly built than I, he succeeded in drawing me with him to the ground.
      We fell together with a heavy crash, tugging and straining in what we were
      both conscious was a mortal struggle. At length I succeeded in getting
      over him, and struck him twice more in the face; still he struggled with
      an energy which nothing but the tremendous stake at issue could have
      sustained.
    </p>
    <p>
      I succeeded again in inflicting several more wounds upon him, any one of
      which might have been mortal. While thus contending he clutched his hands
      about my throat, so firmly that I felt the blood swelling the veins of my
      temples and face almost to bursting. Again and again I struck the weapon
      deep into his face and throat, but life seemed to adhere in him with an
      almost INSECT tenacity.
    </p>
    <p>
      My sight now nearly failed, my senses almost forsook me; I felt upon the
      point of suffocation when, with one desperate effort, I struck him another
      and a last blow in the face. The weapon which I wielded had lighted upon
      the eye, and the point penetrated the brain; the body quivered under me,
      the deadly grasp relaxed, and Oliver lay upon the ground a corpse!
    </p>
    <p>
      As I arose and shook the weapon and the bloody cloth from my hand, the
      moon which he had foretold I should never see rise, shone bright and broad
      into the room, and disclosed, with ghastly distinctness, the mangled
      features of the dead soldier; the mouth, full of clotting blood and broken
      teeth, lay open; the eye, close by whose lid the fatal wound had been
      inflicted, was not, as might have been expected, bathed in blood, but had
      started forth nearly from the socket, and gave to the face, by its fearful
      unlikeness to the other glazing orb, a leer more hideous and unearthly
      than fancy ever saw. The wig, with all its rich curls, had fallen with the
      hat to the floor, leaving the shorn head exposed, and in many places
      marked by the recent struggle; the rich lace cravat was drenched in blood,
      and the gay uniform in many places soiled with the same.
    </p>
    <p>
      It is hard to say, with what feelings I looked upon the unsightly and
      revolting mass which had so lately been a living and a comely man. I had
      not any time, however, to spare for reflection; the deed was done&mdash;the
      responsibility was upon me, and all was registered in the book of that God
      who judges rightly.
    </p>
    <p>
      With eager haste I removed from the body such of the military
      accoutrements as were necessary for the purpose of my disguise. I buckled
      on the sword, drew off the military boots, and donned them myself, placed
      the brigadier wig and cocked hat upon my head, threw on the cloak, drew it
      up about my face, and proceeded, with the papers which I found as the
      soldier had foretold me, and the key of the outer lobby, to the door of
      the guard-room; this I opened, and with a firm and rapid tread walked
      through the officers, who rose as I entered, and passed without question
      or interruption to the street-door. Here I was met by the grimlooking
      corporal, Hewson, who, saluting me, said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'How soon, captain, shall the file be drawn out and the prisoner
      despatched?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'In half an hour,' I replied, without raising my voice.
    </p>
    <p>
      The man again saluted, and in two steps I reached the soldier who held the
      two horses, as he had intimated.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Is all right?' said he, eagerly.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Ay,' said I, 'which horse am I to mount?'
    </p>
    <p>
      He satisfied me upon this point, and I threw myself into the saddle; the
      soldier mounted his horse, and dashing the spurs into the flanks of the
      animal which I bestrode, we thundered along the narrow bridge. At the far
      extremity a sentinel, as we approached, called out, 'Who goes there?
      stand, and give the word!' Heedless of the interruption, with my heart
      bounding with excitement, I dashed on, as did also the soldier who
      accompanied me.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Stand, or I fire! give the word!' cried the sentry.
    </p>
    <p>
      'God save the king, and to hell with the prince!' shouted I, flinging the
      cocked hat in his face as I galloped by.
    </p>
    <p>
      The response was the sharp report of a carbine, accompanied by the whiz of
      a bullet, which passed directly between me and my comrade, now riding
      beside me.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Hurrah!' I shouted; 'try it again, my boy.'
    </p>
    <p>
      And away we went at a gallop, which bid fair to distance anything like
      pursuit.
    </p>
    <p>
      Never was spur more needed, however, for soon the clatter of horses'
      hoofs, in full speed, crossing the bridge, came sharp and clear through
      the stillness of the night.
    </p>
    <p>
      Away we went, with our pursuers close behind; one mile was passed, another
      nearly completed. The moon now shone forth, and, turning in the saddle, I
      looked back upon the road we had passed.
    </p>
    <p>
      One trooper had headed the rest, and was within a hundred yards of us.
    </p>
    <p>
      I saw the fellow throw himself from his horse upon the ground.
    </p>
    <p>
      I knew his object, and said to my comrade:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Lower your body&mdash;lie flat over the saddle; the fellow is going to
      fire.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I had hardly spoken when the report of a carbine startled the echoes, and
      the ball, striking the hind leg of my companion's horse, the poor animal
      fell headlong upon the road, throwing his rider head-foremost over the
      saddle.
    </p>
    <p>
      My first impulse was to stop and share whatever fate might await my
      comrade; but my second and wiser one was to spur on, and save myself and
      my despatch.
    </p>
    <p>
      I rode on at a gallop, turning to observe my comrade's fate. I saw his
      pursuer, having remounted, ride rapidly up to him, and, on reaching the
      spot where the man and horse lay, rein in and dismount.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was hardly upon the ground, when my companion shot him dead with one of
      the holster-pistols which he had drawn from the pipe; and, leaping nimbly
      over a ditch at the side of the road, he was soon lost among the ditches
      and thornbushes which covered that part of the country.
    </p>
    <p>
      Another mile being passed, I had the satisfaction to perceive that the
      pursuit was given over, and in an hour more I crossed Thomond Bridge, and
      slept that night in the fortress of Limerick, having delivered the packet,
      the result of whose safe arrival was the destruction of William's great
      train of artillery, then upon its way to the besiegers.
    </p>
    <p>
      Years after this adventure, I met in France a young officer, who I found
      had served in Captain Oliver's regiment; and he explained what I had never
      before understood&mdash;the motives of the man who had wrought my
      deliverance. Strange to say, he was the foster-brother of Oliver, whom he
      thus devoted to death, but in revenge for the most grievous wrong which
      one man can inflict upon another!
    </p>
    <h2>
      'THE QUARE GANDER.'
    </h2>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     Being a Twelfth Extract from the Legacy of the late Francis
     Purcell, P.P. of Drumcoolagh.
</pre>
    <p>
      As I rode at a slow walk, one soft autumn evening, from the once noted and
      noticeable town of Emly, now a squalid village, towards the no less
      remarkable town of Tipperary, I fell into a meditative mood.
    </p>
    <p>
      My eye wandered over a glorious landscape; a broad sea of corn-fields,
      that might have gladdened even a golden age, was waving before me; groups
      of little cabins, with their poplars, osiers, and light mountain ashes,
      clustered shelteringly around them, were scattered over the plain; the
      thin blue smoke arose floating through their boughs in the still evening
      air. And far away with all their broad lights and shades, softened with
      the haze of approaching twilight, stood the bold wild Galties.
    </p>
    <p>
      As I gazed on this scene, whose richness was deepened by the melancholy
      glow of the setting sun, the tears rose to my eyes, and I said:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Alas, my country! what a mournful beauty is thine. Dressed in loveliness
      and laughter, there is mortal decay at thy heart: sorrow, sin, and shame
      have mingled thy cup of misery. Strange rulers have bruised thee, and
      laughed thee to scorn, and they have made all thy sweetness bitter. Thy
      shames and sins are the austere fruits of thy miseries, and thy miseries
      have been poured out upon thee by foreign hands. Alas, my stricken
      country! clothed with this most pity-moving smile, with this most
      unutterably mournful loveliness, thou sore-grieved, thou
      desperately-beloved! Is there for thee, my country, a resurrection?'
    </p>
    <p>
      I know not how long I might have continued to rhapsodize in this strain,
      had not my wandering thoughts been suddenly recalled to my own immediate
      neighbourhood by the monotonous clatter of a horse's hoofs upon the road,
      evidently moving, at that peculiar pace which is neither a walk nor a
      trot, and yet partakes of both, so much in vogue among the southern
      farmers.
    </p>
    <p>
      In a moment my pursuer was up with me, and checking his steed into a walk
      he saluted me with much respect. The cavalier was a light-built fellow,
      with good-humoured sun-burnt features, a shrewd and lively black eye, and
      a head covered with a crop of close curly black hair, and surmounted with
      a turf-coloured caubeen, in the packthread band of which was stuck a short
      pipe, which had evidently seen much service.
    </p>
    <p>
      My companion was a dealer in all kinds of local lore, and soon took
      occasion to let me see that he was so.
    </p>
    <p>
      After two or three short stories, in which the scandalous and supernatural
      were happily blended, we happened to arrive at a narrow road or bohreen
      leading to a snug-looking farm-house.
    </p>
    <p>
      'That's a comfortable bit iv a farm,' observed my comrade, pointing
      towards the dwelling with his thumb; 'a shnug spot, and belongs to the
      Mooneys this long time. 'Tis a noted place for what happened wid the
      famous gandher there in former times.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'And what was that?' inquired I.
    </p>
    <p>
      'What was it happened wid the gandher!' ejaculated my companion in a tone
      of indignant surprise; 'the gandher iv Ballymacrucker, the gandher! Your
      raverance must be a stranger in these parts. Sure every fool knows all
      about the gandher, and Terence Mooney, that was, rest his sowl. Begorra,
      'tis surprisin' to me how in the world you didn't hear iv the gandher; and
      may be it's funnin me ye are, your raverance.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I assured him to the contrary, and conjured him to narrate to me the
      facts, an unacquaintance with which was sufficient it appeared to stamp me
      as an ignoramus of the first magnitude.
    </p>
    <p>
      It did not require much entreaty to induce my communicative friend to
      relate the circumstance, in nearly the following words:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Terence Mooney was an honest boy and well to do; an' he rinted the
      biggest farm on this side iv the Galties; an' bein' mighty cute an' a
      sevare worker, it was small wonder he turned a good penny every harvest.
      But unluckily he was blessed with an ilegant large family iv daughters,
      an' iv coorse his heart was allamost bruck, striving to make up fortunes
      for the whole of them. An' there wasn't a conthrivance iv any soart or
      description for makin' money out iv the farm, but he was up to.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, among the other ways he had iv gettin' up in the world, he always
      kep a power iv turkeys, and all soarts iv poultrey; an' he was out iv all
      rason partial to geese&mdash;an' small blame to him for that same&mdash;for
      twice't a year you can pluck them as bare as my hand&mdash;an' get a fine
      price for the feathers, an' plenty of rale sizable eggs&mdash;an' when
      they are too ould to lay any more, you can kill them, an' sell them to the
      gintlemen for goslings, d'ye see, let alone that a goose is the most manly
      bird that is out.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, it happened in the coorse iv time that one ould gandher tuck a
      wondherful likin' to Terence, an' divil a place he could go serenadin'
      about the farm, or lookin' afther the men, but the gandher id be at his
      heels, an' rubbin' himself agin his legs, an' lookin' up in his face jist
      like any other Christian id do; an' begorra, the likes iv it was never
      seen&mdash;Terence Mooney an' the gandher wor so great.
    </p>
    <p>
      'An' at last the bird was so engagin' that Terence would not allow it to
      be plucked any more, an' kep it from that time out for love an' affection&mdash;just
      all as one like one iv his childer.
    </p>
    <p>
      'But happiness in perfection never lasts long, an' the neighbours begin'd
      to suspect the nathur an' intentions iv the gandher, an' some iv them said
      it was the divil, an' more iv them that it was a fairy.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, Terence could not but hear something of what was sayin', an' you
      may be sure he was not altogether asy in his mind about it, an' from one
      day to another he was gettin' more ancomfortable in himself, until he
      detarmined to sind for Jer Garvan, the fairy docthor in Garryowen, an'
      it's he was the ilegant hand at the business, an' divil a sperit id say a
      crass word to him, no more nor a priest. An' moreover he was very great
      wid ould Terence Mooney&mdash;this man's father that' was.
    </p>
    <p>
      'So without more about it he was sint for, an' sure enough the divil a
      long he was about it, for he kem back that very evenin' along wid the boy
      that was sint for him, an' as soon as he was there, an' tuck his supper,
      an' was done talkin' for a while, he begined of coorse to look into the
      gandher.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, he turned it this away an' that away, to the right an' to the left,
      an' straight-ways an' upside-down, an' when he was tired handlin' it, says
      he to Terence Mooney:
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Terence," says he, "you must remove the bird into the next room," says
      he, "an' put a petticoat," says he, "or anny other convaynience round his
      head," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"An' why so?" says Terence.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Becase," says Jer, says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Becase what?" says Terence.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Becase," says Jer, "if it isn't done you'll never be asy again," says
      he, "or pusilanimous in your mind," says he; "so ax no more questions, but
      do my biddin'," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Well," says Terence, "have your own way," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'An' wid that he tuck the ould gandher, an' giv' it to one iv the
      gossoons.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"An' take care," says he, "don't smother the crathur," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, as soon as the bird was gone, says Jer Garvan says he:
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Do you know what that ould gandher IS, Terence Mooney?"
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Divil a taste," says Terence.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Well then," says Jer, "the gandher is your own father," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"It's jokin' you are," says Terence, turnin' mighty pale; "how can an
      ould gandher be my father?" says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"I'm not funnin' you at all," says Jer; "it's thrue what I tell you, it's
      your father's wandhrin' sowl," says he, "that's naturally tuck pissession
      iv the ould gandher's body," says he. "I know him many ways, and I
      wondher," says he, "you do not know the cock iv his eye yourself," says
      he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Oh blur an' ages!" says Terence, "what the divil will I ever do at all
      at all," says he; "it's all over wid me, for I plucked him twelve times at
      the laste," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"That can't be helped now," says Jer; "it was a sevare act surely," says
      he, "but it's too late to lamint for it now," says he; "the only way to
      prevint what's past," says he, "is to put a stop to it before it happens,"
      says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Thrue for you," says Terence, "but how the divil did you come to the
      knowledge iv my father's sowl," says he, "bein' in the owld gandher," says
      he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"If I tould you," says Jer, "you would not undherstand me," says he,
      "without book-larnin' an' gasthronomy," says he; "so ax me no questions,"
      says he, "an' I'll tell you no lies. But blieve me in this much," says he,
      "it's your father that's in it," says he; "an' if I don't make him spake
      to-morrow mornin'," says he, "I'll give you lave to call me a fool," says
      he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Say no more," says Terence, "that settles the business," says he; "an'
      oh! blur and ages is it not a quare thing," says he, "for a dacent
      respictable man," says he, "to be walkin' about the counthry in the shape
      iv an ould gandher," says he; "and oh, murdher, murdher! is not it often I
      plucked him," says he, "an' tundher and ouns might not I have ate him,"
      says he; and wid that he fell into a could parspiration, savin' your
      prisince, an was on the pint iv faintin' wid the bare notions iv it.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, whin he was come to himself agin, says Jerry to him quite an' asy:
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Terence," says he, "don't be aggravatin' yourself," says he; "for I have
      a plan composed that 'ill make him spake out," says he, "an' tell what it
      is in the world he's wantin'," says he; "an' mind an' don't be comin' in
      wid your gosther, an' to say agin anything I tell you," says he, "but jist
      purtind, as soon as the bird is brought back," says he, "how that we're
      goin' to sind him to-morrow mornin' to market," says he. "An' if he don't
      spake to-night," says he, "or gother himself out iv the place," says he,
      "put him into the hamper airly, and sind him in the cart," says he,
      "straight to Tipperary, to be sould for ating," says he, "along wid the
      two gossoons," says he, "an' my name isn't Jer Garvan," says he, "if he
      doesn't spake out before he's half-way," says he. "An' mind," says he, "as
      soon as iver he says the first word," says he, "that very minute bring him
      aff to Father Crotty," says he; "an' if his raverince doesn't make him
      ratire," says he, "like the rest iv his parishioners, glory be to God,"
      says he, "into the siclusion iv the flames iv purgathory," says he,
      "there's no vartue in my charums," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, wid that the ould gandher was let into the room agin, an' they all
      bigined to talk iv sindin' him the nixt mornin' to be sould for roastin'
      in Tipperary, jist as if it was a thing andoubtingly settled. But divil a
      notice the gandher tuck, no more nor if they wor spaking iv the
      Lord-Liftinant; an' Terence desired the boys to get ready the kish for the
      poulthry, an' to "settle it out wid hay soft an' shnug," says he, "for
      it's the last jauntin' the poor ould gandher 'ill get in this world," says
      he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, as the night was gettin' late, Terence was growin' mighty sorrowful
      an' down-hearted in himself entirely wid the notions iv what was goin' to
      happen. An' as soon as the wife an' the crathurs war fairly in bed, he
      brought out some illigint potteen, an' himself an' Jer Garvan sot down to
      it; an' begorra, the more anasy Terence got, the more he dhrank, and
      himself and Jer Garvan finished a quart betune them. It wasn't an imparial
      though, an' more's the pity, for them wasn't anvinted antil short since;
      but divil a much matther it signifies any longer if a pint could hould two
      quarts, let alone what it does, sinst Father Mathew&mdash;the Lord purloin
      his raverence&mdash;begin'd to give the pledge, an' wid the blessin' iv
      timperance to deginerate Ireland.
    </p>
    <p>
      'An' begorra, I have the medle myself; an' it's proud I am iv that same,
      for abstamiousness is a fine thing, although it's mighty dhry.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, whin Terence finished his pint, he thought he might as well stop;
      "for enough is as good as a faste," says he; "an' I pity the vagabond,"
      says he, "that is not able to conthroul his licquor," says he, "an' to
      keep constantly inside iv a pint measure," said he; an' wid that he wished
      Jer Garvan a good-night, an' walked out iv the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      'But he wint out the wrong door, bein' a thrifle hearty in himself, an'
      not rightly knowin' whether he was standin' on his head or his heels, or
      both iv them at the same time, an' in place iv gettin' into bed, where did
      he thrun himself but into the poulthry hamper, that the boys had settled
      out ready for the gandher in the mornin'. An' sure enough he sunk down
      soft an' complate through the hay to the bottom; an' wid the turnin' and
      roulin' about in the night, the divil a bit iv him but was covered up as
      shnug as a lumper in a pittaty furrow before mornin'.
    </p>
    <p>
      'So wid the first light, up gets the two boys, that war to take the
      sperit, as they consaved, to Tipperary; an' they cotched the ould gandher,
      an' put him in the hamper, and clapped a good wisp iv hay an' the top iv
      him, and tied it down sthrong wid a bit iv a coard, and med the sign iv
      the crass over him, in dhread iv any harum, an' put the hamper up an the
      car, wontherin' all the while what in the world was makin' the ould burd
      so surprisin' heavy.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, they wint along quite anasy towards Tipperary, wishin' every minute
      that some iv the neighbours bound the same way id happen to fall in with
      them, for they didn't half like the notions iv havin' no company but the
      bewitched gandher, an' small blame to them for that same.
    </p>
    <p>
      'But although they wor shaking in their skhins in dhread iv the ould bird
      beginnin' to convarse them every minute, they did not let an' to one
      another, bud kep singin' an' whistlin' like mad, to keep the dread out iv
      their hearts.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, afther they war on the road betther nor half an hour, they kem to
      the bad bit close by Father Crotty's, an' there was one divil of a rut
      three feet deep at the laste; an' the car got sich a wondherful chuck
      goin' through it, that it wakened Terence widin in the basket.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Bad luck to ye," says he, "my bones is bruck wid yer thricks; what the
      divil are ye doin' wid me?"
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Did ye hear anything quare, Thady?" says the boy that was next to the
      car, turnin' as white as the top iv a musharoon; "did ye hear anything
      quare soundin' out iv the hamper?" says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"No, nor you," says Thady, turnin' as pale as himself, "it's the ould
      gandher that's gruntin' wid the shakin' he's gettin'," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Where the divil have ye put me into," says Terence inside, "bad luck to
      your sowls," says he, "let me out, or I'll be smothered this minute," says
      he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"There's no use in purtending," says the boy, "the gandher's spakin',
      glory be to God," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Let me out, you murdherers," says Terence.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"In the name iv the blessed Vargin," says Thady, "an' iv all the holy
      saints, hould yer tongue, you unnatheral gandher," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Who's that, that dar to call me nicknames?" says Terence inside, roaring
      wid the fair passion, "let me out, you blasphamious infiddles," says he,
      "or by this crass I'll stretch ye," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"In the name iv all the blessed saints in heaven," says Thady, "who the
      divil are ye?"
    </p>
    <p>
      '"Who the divil would I be, but Terence Mooney," says he. "It's myself
      that's in it, you unmerciful bliggards," says he, "let me out, or by the
      holy, I'll get out in spite iv yes," says he, "an' by jaburs, I'll wallop
      yes in arnest," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"It's ould Terence, sure enough," says Thady, "isn't it cute the fairy
      docthor found him out," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      '"I'm an the pint iv snuffication," says Terence, "let me out, I tell you,
      an' wait till I get at ye," says he, "for begorra, the divil a bone in
      your body but I'll powdher," says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'An' wid that, he biginned kickin' and flingin' inside in the hamper, and
      dhrivin his legs agin the sides iv it, that it was a wonder he did not
      knock it to pieces.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, as soon as the boys seen that, they skelped the ould horse into a
      gallop as hard as he could peg towards the priest's house, through the
      ruts, an' over the stones; an' you'd see the hamper fairly flyin' three
      feet up in the air with the joultin'; glory be to God.
    </p>
    <p>
      'So it was small wondher, by the time they got to his Raverince's door,
      the breath was fairly knocked out of poor Terence, so that he was lyin'
      speechless in the bottom iv the hamper.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, whin his Raverince kem down, they up an' they tould him all that
      happened, an' how they put the gandher into the hamper, an' how he
      beginned to spake, an' how he confissed that he was ould Terence Mooney;
      an' they axed his honour to advise them how to get rid iv the spirit for
      good an' all.
    </p>
    <p>
      'So says his Raverince, says he:
    </p>
    <p>
      '"I'll take my booke," says he, "an' I'll read some rale sthrong holy bits
      out iv it," says he, "an' do you get a rope and put it round the hamper,"
      says he, "an' let it swing over the runnin' wather at the bridge," says
      he, "an' it's no matther if I don't make the spirit come out iv it," says
      he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, wid that, the priest got his horse, and tuck his booke in undher
      his arum, an' the boys follied his Raverince, ladin' the horse down to the
      bridge, an' divil a word out iv Terence all the way, for he seen it was no
      use spakin', an' he was afeard if he med any noise they might thrait him
      to another gallop an finish him intirely.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, as soon as they war all come to the bridge, the boys tuck the rope
      they had with them, an' med it fast to the top iv the hamper an' swung it
      fairly over the bridge, lettin' it hang in the air about twelve feet out
      iv the wather.
    </p>
    <p>
      'An' his Raverince rode down to the bank of the river, close by, an'
      beginned to read mighty loud and bould intirely.
    </p>
    <p>
      'An' when he was goin' on about five minutes, all at onst the bottom iv
      the hamper kem out, an' down wint Terence, falling splash dash into the
      water, an' the ould gandher a-top iv him. Down they both went to the
      bottom, wid a souse you'd hear half a mile off.
    </p>
    <p>
      'An' before they had time to rise agin, his Raverince, wid the fair
      astonishment, giv his horse one dig iv the spurs, an' before he knew where
      he was, in he went, horse an' all, a-top iv them, an' down to the bottom.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Up they all kem agin together, gaspin' and puffin', an' off down wid the
      current wid them, like shot in under the arch iv the bridge till they kem
      to the shallow wather.
    </p>
    <p>
      'The ould gandher was the first out, and the priest and Terence kem next,
      pantin' an' blowin' an' more than half dhrounded, an' his Raverince was so
      freckened wid the droundin' he got, and wid the sight iv the sperit, as he
      consaved, that he wasn't the better of it for a month.
    </p>
    <p>
      'An' as soon as Terence could spake, he swore he'd have the life of the
      two gossoons; but Father Crotty would not give him his will. An' as soon
      as he was got quiter, they all endivoured to explain it; but Terence
      consaved he went raly to bed the night before, and his wife said the same
      to shilter him from the suspicion for havin' th' dthrop taken. An' his
      Raverince said it was a mysthery, an' swore if he cotched anyone laughin'
      at the accident, he'd lay the horsewhip across their shouldhers.
    </p>
    <p>
      'An' Terence grew fonder an' fonder iv the gandher every day, until at
      last he died in a wondherful old age, lavin' the gandher afther him an' a
      large family iv childher.
    </p>
    <p>
      'An' to this day the farm is rinted by one iv Terence Mooney's lenial and
      legitimate postariors.'
    </p>
    <h2>
      BILLY MALOWNEY'S TASTE OF LOVE AND GLORY.
    </h2>
    <p>
      Let the reader fancy a soft summer evening, the fresh dews falling on bush
      and flower. The sun has just gone down, and the thrilling vespers of
      thrushes and blackbirds ring with a wild joy through the saddened air; the
      west is piled with fantastic clouds, and clothed in tints of crimson and
      amber, melting away into a wan green, and so eastward into the deepest
      blue, through which soon the stars will begin to peep.
    </p>
    <p>
      Let him fancy himself seated upon the low mossy wall of an ancient
      churchyard, where hundreds of grey stones rise above the sward, under the
      fantastic branches of two or three half-withered ash-trees, spreading
      their arms in everlasting love and sorrow over the dead.
    </p>
    <p>
      The narrow road upon which I and my companion await the tax-cart that is
      to carry me and my basket, with its rich fruitage of speckled trout, away,
      lies at his feet, and far below spreads an undulating plain, rising
      westward again into soft hills, and traversed (every here and there
      visibly) by a winding stream which, even through the mists of evening,
      catches and returns the funereal glories of the skies.
    </p>
    <p>
      As the eye traces its wayward wanderings, it loses them for a moment in
      the heaving verdure of white-thorns and ash, from among which floats from
      some dozen rude chimneys, mostly unseen, the transparent blue film of turf
      smoke. There we know, although we cannot see it, the steep old bridge of
      Carrickadrum spans the river; and stretching away far to the right the
      valley of Lisnamoe: its steeps and hollows, its straggling hedges, its
      fair-green, its tall scattered trees, and old grey tower, are disappearing
      fast among the discoloured tints and haze of evening.
    </p>
    <p>
      Those landmarks, as we sit listlessly expecting the arrival of our modest
      conveyance, suggest to our companion&mdash;a bare-legged Celtic brother of
      the gentle craft, somewhat at the wrong side of forty, with a
      turf-coloured caubeen, patched frieze, a clear brown complexion, dark-grey
      eyes, and a right pleasant dash of roguery in his features&mdash;the tale,
      which, if the reader pleases, he is welcome to hear along with me just as
      it falls from the lips of our humble comrade.
    </p>
    <p>
      His words I can give, but your own fancy must supply the advantages of an
      intelligent, expressive countenance, and, what is perhaps harder still,
      the harmony of his glorious brogue, that, like the melodies of our own
      dear country, will leave a burden of mirth or of sorrow with nearly equal
      propriety, tickling the diaphragm as easily as it plays with the
      heart-strings, and is in itself a national music that, I trust, may never,
      never&mdash;scouted and despised though it be&mdash;never cease, like the
      lost tones of our harp, to be heard in the fields of my country, in
      welcome or endearment, in fun or in sorrow, stirring the hearts of Irish
      men and Irish women.
    </p>
    <p>
      My friend of the caubeen and naked shanks, then, commenced, and continued
      his relation, as nearly as possible, in the following words:
    </p>
    <p>
      Av coorse ye often heerd talk of Billy Malowney, that lived by the bridge
      of Carrickadrum. 'Leum-a-rinka' was the name they put on him, he was sich
      a beautiful dancer. An' faix, it's he was the rale sportin' boy, every way&mdash;killing
      the hares, and gaffing the salmons, an' fightin' the men, an' funnin' the
      women, and coortin' the girls; an' be the same token, there was not a
      colleen inside iv his jurisdiction but was breakin' her heart wid the fair
      love iv him.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, this was all pleasant enough, to be sure, while it lasted; but
      inhuman beings is born to misfortune, an' Bill's divarshin was not to last
      always. A young boy can't be continially coortin' and kissin' the girls
      (an' more's the pity) without exposin' himself to the most eminent parril;
      an' so signs all' what should happen Billy Malowney himself, but to fall
      in love at last wid little Molly Donovan, in Coolnamoe.
    </p>
    <p>
      I never could ondherstand why in the world it was Bill fell in love wid
      HER, above all the girls in the country. She was not within four stone
      weight iv being as fat as Peg Brallaghan; and as for redness in the face,
      she could not hould a candle to Judy Flaherty. (Poor Judy! she was my
      sweetheart, the darlin', an' coorted me constant, ever antil she married a
      boy of the Butlers; an' it's twenty years now since she was buried under
      the ould white-thorn in Garbally. But that's no matther!)
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, at any rate, Molly Donovan tuck his fancy, an' that's everything!
      She had smooth brown hair&mdash;as smooth as silk-an' a pair iv soft
      coaxin' eyes&mdash;an' the whitest little teeth you ever seen; an', bedad,
      she was every taste as much in love wid himself as he was.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, now, he was raly stupid wid love: there was not a bit of fun left in
      him. He was good for nothin' an airth bud sittin' under bushes, smokin'
      tobacky, and sighin' till you'd wonder how in the world he got wind for it
      all.
    </p>
    <p>
      An', bedad, he was an illigant scholar, moreover; an', so signs, it's
      many's the song he made about her; an' if you'd be walkin' in the evening,
      a mile away from Carrickadrum, begorra you'd hear him singing out like a
      bull, all across the country, in her praises.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, ye may be sure, ould Tim Donovan and the wife was not a bit too well
      plased to see Bill Malowney coortin' their daughter Molly; for, do ye
      mind, she was the only child they had, and her fortune was thirty-five
      pounds, two cows, and five illigant pigs, three iron pots and a skillet,
      an' a trifle iv poultry in hand; and no one knew how much besides,
      whenever the Lord id be plased to call the ould people out of the way into
      glory!
    </p>
    <p>
      So, it was not likely ould Tim Donovan id be fallin' in love wid poor Bill
      Malowney as aisy as the girls did; for, barrin' his beauty, an' his gun,
      an' his dhudheen, an' his janius, the divil a taste of property iv any
      sort or description he had in the wide world!
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, as bad as that was, Billy would not give in that her father and
      mother had the smallest taste iv a right to intherfare, good or bad.
    </p>
    <p>
      'An' you're welcome to rayfuse me,' says he, 'whin I ax your lave,' says
      he; 'an' I'll ax your lave,' says he, 'whenever I want to coort
      yourselves,' says he; 'but it's your daughter I'm coortin' at the
      present,' says he, 'an that's all I'll say,' says he; 'for I'd as soon
      take a doase of salts as be discoursin' ye,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      So it was a rale blazin' battle betune himself and the ould people; an',
      begorra, there was no soart iv blaguardin' that did not pass betune them;
      an' they put a solemn injection on Molly again seein' him or meetin' him
      for the future.
    </p>
    <p>
      But it was all iv no use. You might as well be pursuadin' the birds agin
      flying, or sthrivin' to coax the stars out iv the sky into your hat, as be
      talking common sinse to them that's fairly bothered and burstin' wid love.
      There's nothin' like it. The toothache an' cholic together id compose you
      betther for an argyment than itself. It leaves you fit for nothin' bud
      nansinse.
    </p>
    <p>
      It's stronger than whisky, for one good drop iv it will make you drunk for
      one year, and sick, begorra, for a dozen.
    </p>
    <p>
      It's stronger than the say, for it'll carry you round the world an' never
      let you sink, in sunshine or storm; an', begorra, it's stronger than Death
      himself, for it is not afeard iv him, bedad, but dares him in every shape.
    </p>
    <p>
      But lovers has quarrels sometimes, and, begorra, when they do, you'd
      a'most imagine they hated one another like man and wife. An' so, signs
      an', Billy Malowney and Molly Donovan fell out one evening at ould Tom
      Dundon's wake; an' whatever came betune them, she made no more about it
      but just draws her cloak round her, and away wid herself and the
      sarvant-girl home again, as if there was not a corpse, or a fiddle, or a
      taste of divarsion in it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, Bill Malowney follied her down the boreen, to try could he deludher
      her back again; but, if she was bitther before, she gave it to him in
      airnest when she got him alone to herself, and to that degree that he
      wished her safe home, short and sulky enough, an' walked back again, as
      mad as the devil himself, to the wake, to pay a respect to poor Tom
      Dundon.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, my dear, it was aisy seen there was something wrong avid Billy
      Malowney, for he paid no attintion the rest of the evening to any soart of
      divarsion but the whisky alone; an' every glass he'd drink it's what he'd
      be wishing the divil had the women, an' the worst iv bad luck to all
      soarts iv courting, until, at last, wid the goodness iv the sperits, an'
      the badness iv his temper, an' the constant flusthration iv cursin', he
      grew all as one as you might say almost, saving your presince, bastely
      drunk!
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, who should he fall in wid, in that childish condition, as he was
      deploying along the road almost as straight as the letter S, an' cursin'
      the girls, an' roarin' for more whisky, but the recruiting-sargent iv the
      Welsh Confusileers.
    </p>
    <p>
      So, cute enough, the sargent begins to convarse him, an' it was not long
      until he had him sitting in Murphy's public-house, wid an elegant dandy iv
      punch before him, an' the king's money safe an' snug in the lowest wrinkle
      of his breeches-pocket.
    </p>
    <p>
      So away wid him, and the dhrums and fifes playing, an' a dozen more
      unforthunate bliggards just listed along with him, an' he shakin' hands
      wid the sargent, and swearin' agin the women every minute, until, be the
      time he kem to himself, begorra, he was a good ten miles on the road to
      Dublin, an' Molly and all behind him.
    </p>
    <p>
      It id be no good tellin' you iv the letters he wrote to her from the
      barracks there, nor how she was breaking her heart to go and see him just
      wanst before he'd go; but the father an' mother would not allow iv it be
      no manes.
    </p>
    <p>
      An' so in less time than you'd be thinkin' about it, the colonel had him
      polished off into it rale elegant soger, wid his gun exercise, and his
      bagnet exercise, and his small sword, and broad sword, and pistol and
      dagger, an' all the rest, an' then away wid him on boord a man-a-war to
      furrin parts, to fight for King George agin Bonyparty, that was great in
      them times.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, it was very soon in everyone's mouth how Billy Malowney was batin'
      all before him, astonishin' the ginerals, an frightenin' the inimy to that
      degree, there was not a Frinchman dare say parley voo outside of the
      rounds iv his camp.
    </p>
    <p>
      You may be sure Molly was proud iv that same, though she never spoke a
      word about it; until at last the news kem home that Billy Malowney was
      surrounded an' murdered by the Frinch army, under Napoleon Bonyparty
      himself. The news was brought by Jack Brynn Dhas, the peddlar, that said
      he met the corporal iv the regiment on the quay iv Limerick, an' how he
      brought him into a public-house and thrated him to a naggin, and got all
      the news about poor Billy Malowney out iv him while they war dhrinkin' it;
      an' a sorrowful story it was.
    </p>
    <p>
      The way it happened, accordin' as the corporal tould him, was jist how the
      Jook iv Wellington detarmined to fight a rale tarin' battle wid the
      Frinch, and Bonyparty at the same time was aiqually detarmined to fight
      the divil's own scrimmidge wid the British foorces.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, as soon as the business was pretty near ready at both sides,
      Bonyparty and the general next undher himself gets up behind a bush, to
      look at their inimies through spyglasses, and thry would they know any iv
      them at the distance.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Bedadad!' says the gineral, afther a divil iv a long spy, 'I'd bet half a
      pint,' says he, 'that's Bill Malowney himself,' says he, 'down there,'
      says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Och!' says Bonypart, 'do you tell me so?' says he&mdash;'I'm fairly
      heart-scalded with that same Billy Malowney,' says he; 'an' I think if I
      was wanst shut iv him I'd bate the rest iv them aisy,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I'm thinking so myself,' says the gineral, says he; 'but he's a tough
      bye,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Tough!' says Bonypart, 'he's the divil,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Begorra, I'd be better plased.' says the gineral, says he, 'to take
      himself than the Duke iv Willinton,' says he, 'an' Sir Edward Blakeney
      into the bargain,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'The Duke of Wellinton and Gineral Blakeney,' says Bonypart, 'is great for
      planning, no doubt,' says he; 'but Billy Malowney's the boy for ACTION,'
      says he&mdash;'an' action's everything, just now,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      So wid that Bonypart pushes up his cocked hat, and begins scratching his
      head, and thinning and considherin' for the bare life, and at last says he
      to the gineral:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Gineral Commandher iv all the Foorces,' says he, 'I've hot it,' says he:
      'ordher out the forlorn hope,' says he, 'an' give them as much powdher,
      both glazed and blasting,' says he, 'an' as much bullets do ye mind, an'
      swan-dhrops an' chain-shot,' says he, 'an' all soorts iv waipons an'
      combustables as they can carry; an' let them surround Bill Malowney,' says
      he, 'an' if they can get any soort iv an advantage,' says he, 'let them
      knock him to smithereens,' says he, 'an' then take him presner,' says he;
      'an' tell all the bandmen iv the Frinch army,' says he, 'to play up
      "Garryowen," to keep up their sperits,' says he, 'all the time they're
      advancin'. An' you may promise them anything you like in my name,' says
      he; for, by my sowl, I don't think its many iv them 'ill come back to
      throuble us,' says he, winkin' at him.
    </p>
    <p>
      So away with the gineral, an' he ordhers out the forlorn hope, all' tells
      the band to play, an' everything else, just as Bonypart desired him. An'
      sure enough, whin Billy Malowney heerd the music where he was standin'
      taking a blast of the dhudheen to compose his mind for murdherin' the
      Frinchmen as usual, being mighty partial to that tune intirely, he cocks
      his ear a one side, an' down he stoops to listen to the music; but,
      begorra, who should be in his rare all the time but a Frinch grannideer
      behind a bush, and seeing him stooped in a convanient forum, bedad he let
      flies at him sthraight, and fired him right forward between the legs an'
      the small iv the back, glory be to God! with what they call (saving your
      presence) a bum-shell.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, Bill Malowney let one roar out iv him, an' away he rowled over the
      field iv battle like a slitther (as Bonypart and the Duke iv Wellington,
      that was watching the manoeuvres from a distance, both consayved) into
      glory.
    </p>
    <p>
      An' sure enough the Frinch was overjoyed beyant all bounds, an' small
      blame to them&mdash;an' the Duke of Wellington, I'm toult, was never all
      out the same man sinst.
    </p>
    <p>
      At any rate, the news kem home how Billy Malowney was murdhered by the
      Frinch in furrin parts.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, all this time, you may be sure, there was no want iv boys comin' to
      coort purty Molly Donovan; but one way ar another, she always kept puttin'
      them off constant. An' though her father and mother was nathurally anxious
      to get rid of her respickably, they did not like to marry her off in spite
      iv her teeth.
    </p>
    <p>
      An' this way, promising one while and puttin' it off another, she
      conthrived to get on from one Shrove to another, until near seven years
      was over and gone from the time when Billy Malowney listed for furrin
      sarvice.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was nigh hand a year from the time whin the news iv Leum-a-rinka bein'
      killed by the Frinch came home, an' in place iv forgettin' him, as the
      saisins wint over, it's what Molly was growin' paler and more lonesome
      every day, antil the neighbours thought she was fallin' into a decline;
      and this is the way it was with her whin the fair of Lisnamoe kem round.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was a beautiful evenin', just at the time iv the reapin' iv the oats,
      and the sun was shinin' through the red clouds far away over the hills iv
      Cahirmore.
    </p>
    <p>
      Her father an' mother, an' the boys an' girls, was all away down in the
      fair, and Molly Sittin' all alone on the step of the stile, listening to
      the foolish little birds whistlin' among the leaves&mdash;and the sound of
      the mountain-river flowin' through the stones an' bushes&mdash;an' the
      crows flyin' home high overhead to the woods iv Glinvarlogh&mdash;an' down
      in the glen, far away, she could see the fair-green iv Lisnamoe in the
      mist, an' sunshine among the grey rocks and threes&mdash;an' the cows an'
      the horses, an' the blue frieze, an' the red cloaks, an' the tents, an'
      the smoke, an' the ould round tower&mdash;all as soft an' as sorrowful as
      a dhrame iv ould times.
    </p>
    <p>
      An' while she was looking this way, an' thinking iv Leum-a-rinka&mdash;poor
      Bill iv the dance, that was sleepin' in his lonesome glory in the fields
      iv Spain&mdash;she began to sing the song he used to like so well in the
      ould times&mdash;
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
          'Shule, shule, shale a-roon;'
</pre>
    <p>
      an' when she ended the verse, what do you think but she heard a manly
      voice just at the other side iv the hedge, singing the last words over
      again!
    </p>
    <p>
      Well she knew it; her heart flutthered up like a little bird that id be
      wounded, and then dhropped still in her breast. It was himself. In a
      minute he was through the hedge and standing before her.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Leum!' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Mavourneen cuishla machree!' says he; and without another word they were
      locked in one another's arms.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, it id only be nansinse for me thryin' an' tell ye all the foolish
      things they said, and how they looked in one another's faces, an' laughed,
      an' cried, an' laughed again; and how, when they came to themselves, and
      she was able at last to believe it was raly Billy himself that was there,
      actially holdin' her hand, and lookin' in her eyes the same way as ever,
      barrin' he was browner and boulder, an' did not, maybe, look quite as
      merry in himself as he used to do in former times&mdash;an' fondher for
      all, an' more lovin' than ever&mdash;how he tould her all about the wars
      wid the Frinchmen&mdash;an' how he was wounded, and left for dead in the
      field iv battle, bein' shot through the breast, and how he was discharged,
      an' got a pinsion iv a full shillin' a day&mdash;and how he was come back
      to liv the rest iv his days in the sweet glen iv Lisnamoe, an' (if only
      SHE'D consint) to marry herself in spite iv them all.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, ye may aisily think they had plinty to talk about, afther seven
      years without once seein' one another; and so signs on, the time flew by
      as swift an' as pleasant as a bird on the wing, an' the sun wint down, an'
      the moon shone sweet an' soft instead, an' they two never knew a ha'porth
      about it, but kept talkin' an' whisperin', an' whisperin' an' talkin'; for
      it's wondherful how often a tinder-hearted girl will bear to hear a purty
      boy tellin' her the same story constant over an' over; ontil at last, sure
      enough, they heerd the ould man himself comin' up the boreen, singin' the
      'Colleen Rue'&mdash;a thing he never done barrin' whin he had a dhrop in;
      an' the misthress walkin' in front iv him, an' two illigant Kerry cows he
      just bought in the fair, an' the sarvint boys dhriving them behind.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh, blessed hour!' says Molly, 'here's my father.'
    </p>
    <p>
      'I'll spake to him this minute,' says Bill.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh, not for the world,' says she; 'he's singin' the "Colleen Rue,"' says
      she, 'and no one dar raison with him,' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'An' where 'll I go, thin?' says he, 'for they're into the haggard an top
      iv us,' says he, 'an' they'll see me iv I lep through the hedge,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Thry the pig-sty,' says she, 'mavourneen,' says she, 'in the name iv
      God,' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, darlint,' says he, 'for your sake,' says he, 'I'll condescend to
      them animals,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      An' wid that he makes a dart to get in; bud, begorra, it was too late&mdash;the
      pigs was all gone home, and the pig-sty was as full as the Burr coach wid
      six inside.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Och! blur-an'-agers,' says he, 'there is not room for a suckin'-pig,'
      says he, 'let alone a Christian,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Well, run into the house, Billy,' says she, 'this minute,' says she, 'an'
      hide yourself antil they're quiet,' says she, 'an' thin you can steal
      out,' says she, 'anknownst to them all,' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I'll do your biddin', says he, 'Molly asthore,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Run in thin,' says she, 'an' I'll go an' meet them,' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      So wid that away wid her, and in wint Billy, an' where 'id he hide himself
      bud in a little closet that was off iv the room where the ould man and
      woman slep'. So he closed the doore, and sot down in an ould chair he
      found there convanient.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, he was not well in it when all the rest iv them comes into the
      kitchen, an' ould Tim Donovan singin' the 'Colleen Rue' for the bare life,
      an' the rest iv them sthrivin' to humour him, and doin' exactly everything
      he bid them, because they seen he was foolish be the manes iv the liquor.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, to be sure all this kep' them long enough, you may be sure, from
      goin' to bed, so that Billy could get no manner iv an advantage to get out
      iv the house, and so he sted sittin' in the dark closet in state, cursin'
      the 'Colleen Rue,' and wondherin' to the divil whin they'd get the ould
      man into his bed. An', as if that was not delay enough, who should come in
      to stop for the night but Father O'Flaherty, of Cahirmore, that was buyin'
      a horse at the fair! An' av course, there was a bed to be med down for his
      raverence, an' some other attintions; an' a long discoorse himself an'
      ould Mrs. Donovan had about the slaughter iv Billy Malowney, an' how he
      was buried on the field iv battle; an' his raverence hoped he got a dacent
      funeral, an' all the other convaniences iv religion. An' so you may
      suppose it was pretty late in the night before all iv them got to their
      beds.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, Tim Donovan could not settle to sleep at all at all, an' so he kep'
      discoorsin' the wife about the new cows he bought, an' the stripphers he
      sould, an' so an for better than an hour, ontil from one thing to another
      he kem to talk about the pigs, an' the poulthry; and at last, having
      nothing betther to discoorse about, he begun at his daughter Molly, an'
      all the heartscald she was to him be raison iv refusin' the men. An' at
      last says he:
    </p>
    <p>
      'I onderstand,' says he, 'very well how it is,' says he. 'It's how she was
      in love,' says he, 'wid that bliggard, Billy Malowney,' says he, 'bad luck
      to him!' says he; for by this time he was coming to his raison.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Ah!' says the wife, says she, 'Tim darlint, don't be cursin' them that's
      dead an' buried,' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'An' why would not I,' says he, 'if they desarve it?' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Whisht,' says she, 'an' listen to that,' says she. 'In the name of the
      Blessed Vargin,' says she, 'what IS it?' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      An' sure enough what was it but Bill Malowney that was dhroppin' asleep in
      the closet, an' snorin' like a church organ.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Is it a pig,' says he, 'or is it a Christian?'
    </p>
    <p>
      'Arra! listen to the tune iv it,' says she; 'sure a pig never done the
      like is that,' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Whatever it is,' says he, 'it's in the room wid us,' says he. 'The Lord
      be marciful to us!' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I tould you not to be cursin',' says she; 'bad luck to you,' says she,
      'for an ommadhaun!' for she was a very religious woman in herself.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Sure, he's buried in Spain,' says he; 'an' it is not for one little
      innocent expression,' says he, 'he'd be comin' all that a way to annoy the
      house,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, while they war talkin', Bill turns in the way he was sleepin' into
      an aisier imposture; and as soon as he stopped snorin' ould Tim Donovan's
      courage riz agin, and says he:
    </p>
    <p>
      'I'll go to the kitchen,' says he, 'an' light a rish,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      An' with that away wid him, an' the wife kep' workin' the beads all the
      time, an' before he kem back Bill was snorin' as loud as ever.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh! bloody wars&mdash;I mane the blessed saints about us!&mdash;that
      deadly sound,' says he; 'it's going on as lively as ever,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'I'm as wake as a rag,' says his wife, says she, 'wid the fair anasiness,'
      says she. 'It's out iv the little closet it's comin,' says she.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Say your prayers,' says he, 'an' hould your tongue,' says he, 'while I
      discoorse it,' says he. 'An' who are ye,' says he, 'in the name iv of all
      the holy saints?' says he, givin' the door a dab iv a crusheen that
      wakened Bill inside. 'I ax,' says he, 'who are you?' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, Bill did not rightly remember where in the world he was, but he
      pushed open the door, an' says he:
    </p>
    <p>
      'Billy Malowney's my name,' says he, 'an' I'll thank ye to tell me a
      betther,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, whin Tim Donovan heard that, an' actially seen that it was Bill
      himself that was in it, he had not strength enough to let a bawl out iv
      him, but he dhropt the candle out iv his hand, an' down wid himself on his
      back in the dark.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, the wife let a screech you'd hear at the mill iv Killraghlin, an'&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      'Oh,' says she, 'the spirit has him, body an' bones!' says she. 'Oh, holy
      St. Bridget&mdash;oh, Mother iv Marcy&mdash;oh, Father O'Flaherty!' says
      she, screechin' murdher from out iv her bed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, Bill Malowney was not a minute remimberin' himself, an' so out wid
      him quite an' aisy, an' through the kitchen; bud in place iv the door iv
      the house, it's what he kem to the door iv Father O'Flaherty's little
      room, where he was jist wakenin' wid the noise iv the screechin' an'
      battherin'; an' bedad, Bill makes no more about it, but he jumps, wid one
      boult, clever an' clane into his raverance's bed.
    </p>
    <p>
      'What do ye mane, you uncivilised bliggard?' says his raverance. 'Is that
      a venerable way,' says he, 'to approach your clargy?' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Hould your tongue,' says Bill, 'an' I'll do ye no harum,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Who are you, ye scoundhrel iv the world?' says his raverance.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Whisht!' says he? 'I'm Billy Malowney,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'You lie!' says his raverance for he was frightened beyont all bearin'&mdash;an'
      he makes but one jump out iv the bed at the wrong side, where there was
      only jist a little place in the wall for a press, an' his raverance could
      not as much as turn in it for the wealth iv kingdoms. 'You lie,' says he;
      'but for feared it's the truth you're tellin',' says he, 'here's at ye in
      the name iv all the blessed saints together!' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      An' wid that, my dear, he blazes away at him wid a Latin prayer iv the
      strongest description, an', as he said himself afterwards, that was iv a
      nature that id dhrive the divil himself up the chimley like a puff iv
      tobacky smoke, wid his tail betune his legs.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Arra, what are ye sthrivin' to say,' says Bill; says he, 'if ye don't
      hould your tongue,' says he, 'wid your parly voo;' says he, 'it's what
      I'll put my thumb on your windpipe,' says he, 'an' Billy Malowney never
      wint back iv his word yet,' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      'Thundher-an-owns,' says his raverance, says he&mdash;seein' the Latin
      took no infect on him, at all at all an' screechin' that you'd think he'd
      rise the thatch up iv the house wid the fair fright&mdash;'and thundher
      and blazes, boys, will none iv yes come here wid a candle, but lave your
      clargy to be choked by a spirit in the dark?' says he.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, be this time the sarvint boys and the rest iv them wor up an' half
      dressed, an' in they all run, one on top iv another, wid pitchforks and
      spades, thinkin' it was only what his raverence slep' a dhrame iv the
      like, by means of the punch he was afther takin' just before he rowl'd
      himself into the bed. But, begorra, whin they seen it was raly Bill
      Malowney himself that was in it, it was only who'd be foremost out agin,
      tumblin' backways, one over another, and his raverence roarin' an' cursin'
      them like mad for not waitin' for him.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, my dear, it was betther than half an hour before Billy Malowney
      could explain to them all how it raly was himself, for begorra they were
      all iv them persuadin' him that he was a spirit to that degree it's a
      wondher he did not give in to it, if it was only to put a stop to the
      argiment.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, his raverence tould the ould people then, there was no use in
      sthrivin' agin the will iv Providence an' the vagaries iv love united; an'
      whin they kem to undherstand to a sartinty how Billy had a shillin' a day
      for the rest iv his days, begorra they took rather a likin' to him, and
      considhered at wanst how he must have riz out of all his nansinse
      entirely, or his gracious Majesty id never have condescinded to show him
      his countenance that way every day of his life, on a silver shillin'.
    </p>
    <p>
      An' so, begorra, they never stopt till it was all settled&mdash;an' there
      was not sich a weddin' as that in the counthry sinst. It's more than forty
      years ago, an' though I was no more nor a gossoon myself, I remimber it
      like yestherday. Molly never looked so purty before, an' Billy Malowney
      was plisant beyont all hearin,' to that degree that half the girls in it
      was fairly tarin' mad&mdash;only they would not let on&mdash;they had not
      him to themselves in place iv her. An' begorra I'd be afeared to tell ye,
      because you would not believe me, since that blessid man Father Mathew put
      an end to all soorts of sociality, the Lord reward him, how many gallons
      iv pottieen whisky was dhrank upon that most solemn and tindher occasion.
    </p>
    <p>
      Pat Hanlon, the piper, had a faver out iv it; an' Neddy Shawn Heigue,
      mountin' his horse the wrong way, broke his collarbone, by the manes iv
      fallin' over his tail while he was feelin' for his head; an' Payther
      Brian, the horse-docther, I am tould, was never quite right in the head
      ever afther; an' ould Tim Donovan was singin' the 'Colleen Rue' night and
      day for a full week; an' begorra the weddin' was only the foundation iv
      fun, and the beginning iv divarsion, for there was not a year for ten
      years afther, an' more, but brought round a christenin' as regular as the
      sasins revarted.
    </p>
